
      Leaving behind possessions and pets, Ukrainians flee to Poland
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

People stand at the border crossing between Poland and Ukraine in Medyka, Poland, on Feb 24, 2022, after Russian President Vladimir Putin authorised a military operation in eastern Ukraine. (Photo: Reuters/Kacper Pempel)
MEDYKA, Poland: Ukrainians fleeing a Russian invasion have started trickling into Poland, with dozens arriving at the normally quiet Medyka crossing on Thursday (Feb 24), some carrying luggage and accompanied by children.
Officials in European Union countries bordering Ukraine, including Romania and Slovakia, said that there was no big influx of refugees for now, but local media and witnesses said that foot traffic was increasing.
Alexander Bazhanov fled his home in eastern Ukraine with his wife and young child, taking only what they could carry and walking the final part of their journey into Poland.
The 34-year-old technical manager from Mariupol, 113km from Donetsk, decided to cross into Poland when he learned that the war had started from a colleague.
"I don't have any feelings other than that I am very scared," Bazhanov said at the pedestrian border crossing, about 400km from Warsaw. "I will visit my father in Spain, but I don't have any money and I don't know how I will do that."
Russian forces invaded Ukraine by land, air and sea on Thursday after President Vladimir Putin authorised what he called a special military operation in the east.
Central European nations that share a border with Ukraine have for weeks braced for an expected flood of refugees searching for sanctuary within the EU.
The Medyka crossing is largely used by people going shopping across the border or travelling for work.
Lines to enter the Polish border town grew during the morning. Some people said that they feared Russia could push far into Ukraine.
"Everybody thought western Ukraine was safe because it was close to EU and NATO nations," said Maria Palys, 44, who was travelling with her family and that of her brother. "It seems like it is not the right protection."
Russia has demanded an end to the eastward expansion of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and Putin repeated his position that Ukrainian membership of the United States-led military alliance would be unacceptable.
Putin said that he had authorised military action after Russia had been left with no choice but to defend itself against what he said were threats from modern Ukraine, a democratic state of 44 million people.
News of the invasion spurred Olga Pavlusik and her boyfriend Bohdan Begey to rush to the border, leaving their dog at home in their town in western Ukraine. They have no destination in mind.
"Anywhere safe will be fine," she told Reuters.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.