
      Poland will not play World Cup match with Russia: Polish FA head
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Sport
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Sport
  

FILE PHOTO: President of the Polish Football Association Cezary Kulesza speaks at a news conference, after Czeslaw Michniewicz was announced by the Polish Football Association (PZPN) as the new national team coach, in Warsaw, Poland, Jan 31, 2022. REUTERS/Kacper Pempel
WARSAW: Poland will not play a World Cup qualifying football match against Russia next month because of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, the president of Poland's Football Association, Cezary Kulesza, said on Saturday (Feb 26).
Kulesza said the association was in talks with its Swedish and Czech counterparts regarding playoff matches set for March to fill a slot for the World Cup.
"The time for talking is over. It is time to act. Due to the escalation of the Russian Federation's aggression in Ukraine, the Polish team does not envisage playing the play-off against Russia," wrote Kulesza.
"This is the only right decision. We are in talks with the Swedish and Czech associations to present a common position to FIFA."
The three federations issued a joint statement on Thursday demanding FIFA move the respective play-offs from Russia.
Polish star Robert Lewandowski had tweeted on Friday that he would consult his teammates about the match and his rejection of war.
"Everything which is beautiful in sports is against what war brings," he said.
"For all people who value freedom and peace, this is a time of solidarity with the victims of the military aggression in Ukraine.
"As the captain of the national team, I will speak with my teammates about the match against Russia, in order to work out a common position on this question and present it to the president of the PZPN (Polish Football Association) as soon as possible."
European football's governing body UEFA punished Russia on Friday by stripping Saint Petersburg of hosting European club football's showpiece event the Champions League final on May 28 and awarded it to Paris.
Russia is due to host Poland in the semi-finals of its strand of the World Cup playoffs on Mar 24 and, if its team advances, is scheduled to host either Sweden or the Czech Republic on Mar 29 in the Path B final.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.