
      'Ukraine will prevail' protests held in Sydney, Tokyo
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Protesters hold banners during a rally against Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in Tokyo, Japan, Feb 26, 2022. (Photo: Reuters)
SYDNEY/TOKYO: Several hundred people marched in heavy rain in Sydney on Saturday (Feb 26) chanting "Ukraine will prevail" and demanding more action against Moscow, while protesters in Tokyo called for Russia to be expelled from the United Nations Security Council.
The fresh protests came as Russian and Ukrainian forces clashed in fighting for Ukraine's capital and after Russia vetoed a draft UN Security Council resolution that would have deplored the Kremlin invasion of Ukraine.
From Tokyo through Warsaw and London to New York, thousands have protested in recent days against the invasion, Europe's biggest security crisis in decades.
Draped in Ukraine's blue and yellow flag and waving the country's national banner, Sydney protesters also carried signs condemning Russian President Vladimir Putin's attempts to topple the Ukrainian government.
Some speakers demanded that the government of Prime Minister Scott Morrison expand sanctions against Moscow and ban Russian citizens from visiting Australia, while others called for NATO to step into the conflict.
"I want more economic sanctions on Russia, I want military help for Ukraine," said Katarina, a protester who gave only her first name. "I want more action, more concrete action and less words. It's too late for diplomacy right now."
Another protester, Mogdan, called on the Australian government to lead other countries in attempts to stop Putin.
"It's World War Three, it's a war not only on Ukraine, it's a war on everyone," the protester said.
A smaller protest took place in front of the Russian embassy in Canberra, Australia's capital, with people carrying signs that read "Putin off Ukraine" and "stop war".
Several hundred Russian, Ukrainian and Japanese protesters gathered in the busy Shibuya shopping district in central Tokyo, many with their children and holding Ukrainian flags, chanting "stop the war" and "stop Putin" in Japanese and English.
"I just want to say, 'Putin stop this, regain your sanity,'" said Hiroshi Sawada, a 58-year-old musician who attended the rally in Tokyo.
A 28-year-old Russian worker who asked not to be named said none of the people she knew from her home country supported the war. "We hate what is just happening now in our country," she said.
Australia and Japan joined the United States, the European Union, and many other countries in imposing a series of rounds of sanctions against Russian politicians, businesses and elite citizens over the invasion.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.