
      Malaysia 'seriously concerned' over escalation of conflict in Ukraine: PM Ismail Sabri
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

A woman with a child walks in front of a damaged residential building at Koshytsa Street, a suburb of the Ukrainian capital Kyiv, where a military shell allegedly hit, on Feb 25, 2022. (Photo: AFP/Daniel LEAL)
BANGKOK: Malaysia is "seriously concerned" over the escalation of conflict in Ukraine and strongly urges all parties involved to immediately take steps to de-escalate and prevent loss of lives and devastation, Prime Minister Ismail Sabri Yaakob said on Saturday (Feb 26).
In a statement, Mr Ismail Sabri said "at this critical juncture, every effort should be redoubled to seek a peaceful and amicable solution to the conflict through dialogue and negotiation based on international law" and the United Nations (UN) Charter.
"Malaysia will continue to support such efforts in the interest of maintaining regional and international peace and security, as well as promoting greater prosperity," he said at a press conference at the end of his three-day official visit to Thailand.
He added that the UN Security Council must carry out its primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Mr Ismail Sabri also said the Embassy of Malaysia in Kyiv is currently undertaking evacuation of the remaining eight Malaysian nationals and two of their foreign dependents from the Ukrainian capital.
"Thirteen of our nationals had already left Ukraine in the past weeks," he said.
Russian President Vladimir Putin on Thursday announced a special military operation in the Donbas region, eastern Ukraine.
Following that, Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelenskyy declared a state of emergency throughout the country.
Ukraine has also announced the closure of its airspace for public use, due to the "high risk" to civil aviation.
Russia's military intervention in Ukraine entered its third day on Saturday with the latest reports indicating that Russian troops were heading towards the capital, Kyiv, from several directions.
Putin ordered the military intervention on Thursday, days after recognising two separatist-held enclaves in eastern Ukraine. 
He claimed that Moscow had no plan to occupy the neighbouring country but wanted to "demilitarise" and "de-Nazify" Ukraine.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.