
      Singaporean among 12 people evacuated from Ukraine: Malaysia foreign ministry 
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Singapore
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Singapore
  

Convoy of evacuees with Chargé d'Affaires ad interim of the Malaysian Embassy in Ukraine, Fadhilah Daud (middle). (Photo: Facebook/Wisma Putra)
SINGAPORE: A Singaporean was among a group of 12 people who have been evacuated from Ukraine’s capital, Kyiv, following Russia’s invasion of the country.
The group, which was also made up of nine Malaysians and two Ukrainian dependants, arrived at the Korczowa-Krakovets border of Ukraine and Poland on Sunday (Feb 27) at 5.45am, Malaysia’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a Facebook post.
They were led by Ms Fadhilah Daud, Chargé d'Affaires ad interim of the Malaysian Embassy in Ukraine.
“The convoy was received by two officials from the Embassy of Malaysia in Poland,” the foreign ministry said. The ministry, otherwise known as Wisma Putra, added that all evacuees and accompanying officials will be heading to Poland’s capital, Warsaw.
“Wisma Putra is in constant contact with officials of the embassies on their location, safety as well as of the accompanying convoy,” it added.
The Singapore High Commission in Kuala Lumpur and Consulate-General in Johor Bahru wrote in a Facebook post on Sunday that it is “grateful” to Malaysia's foreign ministry for assisting the Singaporean to evacuate from Kyiv under difficult circumstances.
“A friend in need is a friend indeed!” it added.
It said that the situation in Ukraine remains “deeply concerning”.
“Singapore strongly condemns any unprovoked invasion of a sovereign country under any pretext. The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine must be respected.” 
Responding to an announcement on Thursday by President Vladimir Putin of the start of a "military operation" in Ukraine, Singapore’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs said: "We hope military actions will cease immediately; and urge a peaceful settlement of the dispute, in accordance with the UN Charter and international law.”
Russia launched its invasion on Ukraine by land, air and sea on Thursday in the biggest attack on a European state since World War II.
At least 137 people were killed and 316 injured in Ukraine on the first day of fighting, with explosions heard in Kyiv early Friday.
So far, more than 198 Ukrainians have been killed and 1,115 people wounded, Interfax quoted Ukraine's Health Ministry as saying.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.