
      More than 100,000 people in Berlin protest Russia's invasion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Demonstrators take part in an anti-war protest in front of the Russian embassy in Berlin, Germany, Feb 22, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Christian Mang)
BERLIN: More than 100,000 people protested in solidarity with Ukraine in Berlin on Sunday (Feb 27), calling for the end of Russia's invasion and saying history should not repeat itself.
Train and underground service were interrupted in some parts of the German capital as thousands made their way to the Brandenburg Gate in central Berlin, near the Russian embassy.
The crowd of protesters bearing signs reading: "Stop the War", "Putin's last war" and "We stand with Ukraine" along with Ukrainian and European Union flags, extended from the Victory Column in the heart of the capital along the Straße des 17 Juni street and boulevard to the Brandenburg Gate.
The street is named after the Jun 17, 1953, uprising in East Germany against its communist rulers.
“STOP THE WAR”: Thousands of protesters in Berlin march near Brandenburg Gate, calling for an end to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. https://cna.asia/3M2HhjL

(Photos: AFP)
The protest comes as Russia's attack on Ukraine entered its fourth day, triggering three sanction packages from Germany and its Western allies and pushing Berlin to shift its decades-long policy of not exporting arms to conflict zones.
"Ukrainians: You're welcome here!" shouted one of the speakers as the crowd cheered.
More than 368,000 refugees, mainly women and children, have fled the fighting into neighbouring countries, the UN refugee agency said on Sunday, citing data provided by national authorities.
The police had expected some 20,000 people to participate in the protest but estimated that the number of people who have taken part is a "six-digit figure", adding that more people were still flocking to the demonstration.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.