
      Chelsea 'praying for peace' over 'horrific' situation in Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Sport
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Sport
  

Ukrainian servicemen inspect a damaged vehicle, at the site of fighting with Russian troops on Feb 26, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Valentyn Ogirenko)
Premier League club Chelsea, owned by Russian Roman Abramovich, issued a statement on Sunday (Feb 27) saying they are praying for peace and described the situation in Ukraine as "horrific".
Abramovich announced on Saturday that he was giving "stewardship and care" of the club to trustees of the London side's foundation.
The Russian's comments came after calls in Britain that he be sanctioned over Moscow's invasion of Ukraine but did not include any reference to Ukraine or the conflict.
"The situation in Ukraine is horrific and devastating. Chelsea FC’s thoughts are with everyone in Ukraine. Everyone at the club is praying for peace," Chelsea said on their website.
Abramovich remains the club owner and his announcement on Saturday did not reveal why he was giving the foundation stewardship nor any details on how the arrangement would work.
Several Russian individuals and entities have been put under sanctions by British Prime Minister Boris Johnson after Moscow launched an all-out invasion of Ukraine by land, air and sea this week.
Abramovich has not faced any sanctions but British opposition lawmakers said on Thursday that he should be included. One said the UK should seize his assets and bar him from owning the football club.
The chairman of the Chelsea foundation trustees is American lawyer Bruce Buck who is also chairman of the club as a whole.
Chelsea manager Thomas Tuchel said on Friday that uncertainty over Abramovich's future was weighing on the club ahead of Sunday's League Cup final.
Chelsea enjoyed unprecedented success after Abramovich took over in 2003, winning five Premier League titles, five FA Cups and the Champions League twice.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.