
      Ukraine invasion: Indonesia foreign minister calls for de-escalation, respect for international law
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Screengrab of CNA's video interview with Indonesian Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi at the sidelines of the 76th session of the United Nations General Assembly on Sep 24, 2021.
JAKARTA: Indonesia Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi on Tuesday (Mar 1) called for the de-escalation of the Russia-Ukraine conflict and respect for international law. 
Speaking at a virtual press conference, Mdm Marsudi said that both countries are close friends of Indonesia and it wants to build a stronger relationship with them. 
She noted that the Indonesian constitution mandates that the government participates in safeguarding world peace. She said that peace cannot be realised if there is war. 
“Indonesia's foreign policy has always been consistent when it comes to the implementation of international law, and the United Nations Charter, including respect for territorial integrity and respect for sovereignty. This principle must be respected by all countries,” said Mdm Marsudi. 
She said that apart from emphasising those principles, Indonesia’s main concern is de-escalation of the conflict and humanitarian issues. 
“De-escalation must be carried out. Once again, this is in line with what is stated in our constitution for peace. We hope that talks between Ukraine and Russia could produce good results,” the top diplomat said.  
Indonesia is prioritising saving human lives and safe passage for those affected by the conflict, she also said.
So far, Indonesia has managed to repatriate the majority of its citizens in Ukraine to Romania and Poland, Mdm Marsudi said. 
A total of 99 Indonesians have left Ukraine and the Indonesian government is still hoping to evacuate 13 others who are in the country. 
The Indonesian government is also aiming to repatriate citizens in Romania and Poland. Around 700,000 and 350,000 Ukrainians have entered Romania and Poland respectively.
Mdm Marsudi revealed that she had telephone conversations with both her Ukrainian and Russian counterparts, without elaborating on the details. 
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has entered the sixth day with the former showing no signs of stopping. 
Moscow is facing increasing isolation internationally as nations imposed sanctions on Russia’s top businesses, oligarchs and officials.  
Last Thursday, Indonesia called for negotiation and diplomacy, while stopping short of announcing sanctions on Moscow.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.