
      Canada shuts ports to Russian ships over Ukraine invasion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

FILE PHOTO: Cargo ships with their shipping containers are seen in the Port of Montreal in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, May 6, 2021.  REUTERS/Christinne Muschi/File Photo
TORONTO: Canada ratcheted up pressure on Russia for its invasion of Ukraine by shutting ports to Russian-owned ships and saying on Tuesday (Mar 1) that holdings of all Russian oligarchs and companies in the country are under review.
Canada has announced a slew of measures to isolate Russia, including imposing sanctions on Russian President Vladimir Putin, closing Canadian airspace to Russian planes, banning oil imports and forbidding Canadian financial institutions from dealing with the Russian central bank, acting in tandem with other Western countries.
"Today, we are taking steps to close Canadian waters and ports to Russian-owned or registered ships," Transport Minister Omar Alghabra said.
Alghabra said while the number of Russian ships entering Canadian waters and ports is "small," there will still be an impact, especially with other countries doing the same.
Russia represents less than 2 per cent of Port of Montreal's annual containerised volumes, and the ban will have little commercial impact, a port spokesperson said.
Port of Vancouver, Canada's busiest, said the number of Russian-flagged vessels calling there is minimal. In the past, those that have traded in crude oil, canola oil and copper concentrates, a spokesperson said.
Canada is tracking three Russian-flagged vessels off the East Coast, one of which is a cargo vessel, a government official told Reuters.
Canada is also scrutinising holdings of all Russian oligarchs and Russian companies in the country, Finance Minister Chrystia Freeland told reporters on Tuesday. "We are reviewing them and everything is on the table," she added.
Canada is sending 1,600 bulletproof vests and almost 400,000 meal rations to Ukraine.
Canada imported C$2.14 billion (US$1.68 billion) worth of goods from Russia in 2021, Statistics Canada data showed, with metals and minerals among the most valuable categories.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.