
      Taiwan president to donate salary for Ukraine relief efforts
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen speaks at a rank conferral ceremony for military officials from the Army, Navy and Air Force, at the defence ministry in Taipei, Taiwan Dec 28, 2021. (Photo: Reuters/Annabelle Chih)
TAIPEI: Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen said on Wednesday (Mar 2) that she, Vice President William Lai and Premier Su Tseng-chang will each donate one month's salary to aid humanitarian relief efforts for Ukraine as it seeks to repel an invasion by Russia.
The war has generated widespread sympathy in Taiwan for Ukraine's people, due to the threat the island says it faces on a daily basis from giant neighbour China. Beijing views Taiwan as its own territory and has stepped up its military pressure to assert those claims.
Tsai, whose government this week send its first batch of aid in the form of 27 tonnes of medical supplies, told a meeting of the ruling Democratic Progressive Party that the determination of Ukraine's people has moved the world and Taiwan's people too.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a "special operation". The forces of global democracy supporting Ukraine are growing stronger, Tsai said.
"As a member of the global partners of democracy, Taiwan is not absent, and we fully support Ukraine."
The Foreign Ministry will provide details of a bank account set up by Taiwan's Relieve Disaster Association for Ukraine relief donations into which Tsai said she, Lai and Su will each donate a month's salary.
A person familiar with the situation told Reuters that Tsai as president receives around NT$400,000 (US$14,250) a month in pay.
Taiwan's Foreign Ministry said separately it has asked its de facto embassy in Warsaw, the Polish government and its "designated" non-government organisations to help distribute the funds to aid Ukrainian refugees.
Taiwan last week also announced it was joined by Western-led sanctions on Russia, though its own trade with the country is minimal.
"I hope that our compatriots, as well as all our party partners in public office, can fully respond to this action and firmly express to the world that Taiwan stands with Ukraine, and Taiwan stands with democracy and freedom," Tsai said.
Taiwan is largely excluded from global organisations like the United Nations due to Chinese pressure but aspires to show it is a responsible member of the international community despite its diplomatic isolation.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.