
      UN General Assembly set to censure Russia over Ukraine invasion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

The United Nations headquarters building is pictured with a UN logo in the Manhattan borough of New York City, New York, US, Mar 1, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Carlo Allegri)
UNITED NATIONS: The United Nations General Assembly is set to reprimand Russia on Wednesday (Mar 2) over its invasion of Ukraine and demand that Moscow stop fighting and withdraw its military forces, a move that aims to diplomatically isolate Russia at the world body.
By Tuesday evening, nearly half the 193-member General Assembly had signed on as co-sponsors of a draft resolution ahead of a vote on Wednesday, diplomats said. The text "deplores" Russia's "aggression against Ukraine".
It is similar to a draft resolution vetoed by Russia in the 15-member Security Council on Friday. No country has a veto in the General Assembly and Western diplomats expect the resolution, which needs two-thirds support, to be adopted.
"Russia's war marks a new reality. It requires each and every one of us to take a firm and responsible decision and to take a side," Germany's Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock told the General Assembly on Tuesday.
While General Assembly resolutions are non-binding, they carry political weight.
The draft text "demands that the Russian Federation immediately, completely, and unconditionally withdraw all of its military forces from the territory of Ukraine within its internationally recognised borders".
Dozens of states are expected to formally abstain from the vote or not engage at all. In two votes by the 15-member UN Security Council on the Ukraine crisis in the past week, China, India and the United Arab Emirates abstained.
"We must leave space for a diplomatic off-ramp," UAE UN Ambassador Lana Nusseibeh said on Tuesday. "Channels must remain open and those countries that did abstain have those channels with President Putin and will use them to help and support in whatever way we can."
The General Assembly vote will come at the end of a rare emergency special session of the body, which was convened by the Security Council on Sunday. Russia was unable to veto the move because it was a procedural matter.
More than 100 countries will have addressed the session before the vote.
The moves at the United Nations are mirroring what happened in 2014 after Russia annexed Ukraine's Crimea region.
The Security Council voted on a draft resolution opposing a referendum on the status of Crimea and urged countries not to recognise it. It was vetoed by Russia.
The General Assembly then adopted a resolution declaring the referendum invalid. It received 100 votes in favour, 11 against and 58 formal abstentions, while two dozen countries did not take part.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.