
      Chelsea owner Abramovich looking to sell club; Swiss tycoon Wyss among 4 offered: Report
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Sport
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Sport
  

Chelsea's Saul Niguez, with Kai Havertz, Andreas Christensen and Marcos Alonso, applauds fans after a Champions League match against Lille on Feb 22, 2022 at Stamford Bridge. (Photo: REUTERS/David Klein)
ZURICH: Swiss business tycoon Hansjoerg Wyss is considering buying football club Chelsea from Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich, Wyss told Swiss newspaper Blick.
"Abramovich is currently trying to sell all his villas in England. He also wants to get rid of Chelsea quickly now. I, along with three other people, received an offer on Tuesday to buy Chelsea from Abramovich," Blick quoted Wyss as saying in an interview published on Wednesday (Mar 2).
Abramovich's spokeswoman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Wyss, 86, founder of the medical device manufacturing firm Synthes, said he would have to wait four or five days to see how things play out.
"Abramovich is asking for far too much at the moment. You know: Chelsea owes him 2 billion pounds. But Chelsea has no money. Meaning: those who buy Chelsea should compensate Abramovich," Wyss told the newspaper.
On Saturday, Abramovich said he was giving "stewardship" of the club to trustees of their charitable foundation after calls for him to be subject to sanctions following Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Since then, several Russian individuals and entities have been put under sanctions by the UK government, and some British opposition lawmakers have said Abramovich should be included on that list.
British Prime Minister Boris Johnson has been pressed on why Abramovich has not been cited, given his familiarity with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Johnson did not refer to the Chelsea owner directly in his answer, but said Britain would be "tightening the economic noose" further around the Russian regime.
"Abramovich is among Putin's closest advisers and friends," Wyss told Blick.
One, Chris Bryant, said the UK should seize his assets and bar him from owning the football club.
The move to pass day-to-day control of the club to the foundation trustees, which includes the club's American chairman Bruce Buck, did not change Abramovich's status as owner of the club.
Wyss said Abramovich's exact sales price was still unclear.
"I can well imagine joining Chelsea with partners. But first I have to check the general conditions carefully. What I can already say, though, is that I certainly won't do something like that on my own. If I buy Chelsea, it will be with a consortium of six or seven investors."
Abramovich bought the West London club in 2003 and his investment has helped produce the most successful era in the team's history - winning five Premier League titles, five FA Cups and the Champions League twice.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.