
      Michelin Guide suspends restaurant recommendations in Russia
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Chefs celebrate on stage during the Michelin Guide 2022 award ceremony in Moscow, Russia, Oct 14, 2021. REUTERS/Maxim Shemetov
Michelin said on Friday (Mar 4) its world famous guide would suspend all restaurant recommendations in Russia in response to Moscow's invasion of Ukraine.
All development projects Russia were now frozen, it said in a statement, adding that all social media and online activity in Russia was also on hold.
"Given the severity of the current crisis, the teams of the Michelin Guide have had to take the decision to suspend all restaurant recommendation activities in Russia," Michelin said.
Michelin in 2021 published its first selection for Moscow, which included nine restaurants that were awarded its coveted stars, a distinction seen as proof of ranking among the best restaurants of the world.
"We have made the choice not to promote Moscow as a destination", Michelin said." As a result, the Moscow selection will not be updated this year."
Michelin's Moscow Guide, the only in Russia, currently includes 69 restaurants.
The Guide, developed at the beginning of the 20th century by French tyre maker Michelin as a handy glove box companion when on the road, is one of the world's most influential rankings for restaurants and hotels, with many country and city editions.
Michelin Guides are published annually, so any mention or star has to be renewed each year.
A Michelin spokesperson said that it was too early to tell if the Guide would put a permanent end to its Russia activities.
In the news release, Michelin said that "in no way do these decisions call into question the talent of the teams and chefs."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.