
      Ukraine is Europe's 'fastest growing refugee' crisis since World War II: UN
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Refugees from Ukraine rest at a temporary shelter in the main train station of Krakow, Poland on Mar 6, 2022. (Photo: AFP/Louisa Gouliamaki)
GENEVA: The number of people fleeing Russia's invasion of Ukraine has topped 1.5 million, making it Europe's fastest-growing refugee crisis since World War II, the United Nations said on Sunday (Mar 6).
"More than 1.5 million refugees from Ukraine have crossed into neighbouring countries in 10 days," the UN High Commissioner for Refugees Filippo Grande tweeted.
The UN described the outflow as "the fastest-growing refugee crisis in Europe since World War II". On Saturday it had reported that nearly 1.37 million refugees had fled.
The director-general of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, also expressed grave concern at the worsening humanitarian situation.
"@WHO has confirmed several attacks on health care in #Ukraine, causing multiple deaths and injuries. Additional reports are being investigated," Tedros tweeted.
"Attacks on healthcare facilities or workers breach medical neutrality and are violations of international humanitarian law."
The WHO said on Sunday it had deployed staff to Moldova, Poland and Romania "to scale up (the) response capacities of its country offices, including operations, engagement with partners and support to the (Ukrainian) government for the health response".
The body said it had also mobilised logistics to set up an operational hub in neighbouring Poland and help secure land corridors "to facilitate rapid movement of supplies to affected populations".
It added a second shipment of health supplies was on its way to Poland, following a first shipment on Thursday that included trauma and emergency health supplies.
The WHO had earlier condemned a slew of verified reports of attacks on health care in Ukraine.
UN officials said they expected the wave of refugees to intensify further as the Russian army pressed its offensive, particularly toward the Ukranian capital Kyiv.
Since Russia invaded on Feb 24, a total of 922,400 people have fled Ukraine to Poland, Polish border guards said on Sunday.
Hungary, Moldova, Romanian and Slovakia have also seen Ukrainian refugees arrive.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.