
      China to provide Ukraine humanitarian aid, praises Russia ties
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

China's Wang Yi, state councillor and foreign minister, waves as he leaves a news conference in Tokyo on Nov 24, 2020. (File photo: Reuters/Issei Kato, Pool)
BEIJING: China's Red Cross will provide humanitarian aid to Ukraine "as soon as possible", Foreign Minister Wang Yi said on Monday (Mar 7), as he praised his country's friendship with Russia as "rock solid".
China has refused to condemn Russia's attack on Ukraine, or call it an invasion, while asking Western countries to respect Russia's "legitimate security concerns".
Wang said that the causes of the "Ukraine situation" were "complex" and had not happened overnight, noting, using a traditional Chinese expression, that "three feet of ice does not form in a single day".
"Solving complex problems requires calmness and rationality, rather than adding fuel to the fire and intensifying contradictions," he told a news conference on the sidelines of the annual meeting of China's parliament.
China has already done "some work" to promote peace talks and has all along been in contact with all sides, he added.
"China is willing to continue to play a constructive role in pushing for peace and promoting talks, and is willing to work with the international community to carry out necessary mediation when needed," he said.
China is also willing to continue to make its own efforts to resolve the humanitarian crisis, and the country's Red Cross will "as soon as possible" provide a batch of aid to Ukraine, Wang said, without giving details. It was the first time the country has announced such help.
China proposes that "humanitarian action" must abide by the principles of neutrality and impartiality, and humanitarian issues should not be politicised, he added.
Russian President Vladimir Putin met Chinese President Xi Jinping hours before the start of last month's Winter Olympics in Beijing, and they signed a wide-ranging strategic partnership aimed at countering United States influence, saying that they would have "no 'forbidden' areas of cooperation".
Wang said that the friendship between China and Russia was "rock solid" and prospects for cooperation bright.
"No matter how sinister the international situation is, both China and Russia will maintain their strategic determination and continuously push forward the comprehensive strategic partnership of coordination in the new era," he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.