
      US lawmakers pressure Biden to help with transfer of European aircraft to Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A French Rafale fighter jet is seen over France on Jan 14, 2020. (File photo: Reuters/Johanna Geron)
WASHINGTON: United States lawmakers pushed President Joe Biden's administration on Monday (Mar 7) to facilitate the transfer of fighter aircraft to Ukraine from Poland and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Eastern European countries, after a plea on Saturday from Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy.
The White House said that it did not oppose planes being sent to Ukraine but saw logistical challenges to it.
Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Bob Menendez wrote to Secretary of State Antony Blinken and Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin calling for Washington to commit to replace any donated jets with upgraded Western aircraft, including through concessionary financing and loans as well as subsidised pricing.
He also said that NATO should redeploy fighter aircraft to any base where donated aircraft had been stationed.
Zelenskyy made a "desperate plea for European countries to provide Russian-made planes" for Ukraine's fight against Russian invaders during a video call on Saturday with US lawmakers, participants in the call said.
Many air forces in Eastern Europe fly Russian-made warplanes, and transferring such aircraft to Ukraine would mean that Ukrainians could pilot the planes without additional training.
"I will support efforts in the Senate to implement measures to compensate our allies that provide their aircraft for Ukraine's defence," Menendez wrote.
Members of the US Senate who attended a briefing on Ukraine by State Department officials on Monday evening said that they did not believe Poland had made up its mind about whether to send the aircraft. Some said that other countries might also send planes, but declined to identify any.
A State Department spokesperson said that the department was working with Poland and consulting with other NATO allies.
"This is Poland's sovereign decision to make. We have in no way opposed Poland transferring planes to Ukraine," the spokesperson said in an email.
Administration officials said that there were logistical challenges both in moving aircraft into Ukraine, and providing replacement US planes.
"It is not as easy as just moving planes around," White House press secretary Jen Psaki said.
Many lawmakers - both Biden's fellow Democrats and Republicans - have appealed for Washington to do all it can to get aircraft to Ukraine, including by letting countries that send Russian-made MiGs "jump the line" to quickly obtain US-made F-16s - made by Lockheed Martin - to replace them.
Russia describes its actions as "a special military operation" whose aim is to disarm Ukraine, counter what it views as NATO aggression and capture Ukrainian leaders it calls neo-Nazis.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.