
      Nuclear reactor restarts could be 'best option' for Japan to ride out energy shortages: Senior lawmaker 
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

FILE PHOTO: Police officers and security personnel stand guard at an entrance of Kyushu Electric Power's Sendai nuclear power station, during a protest demanding for the stop of the plant's restart, in Satsumasendai, Kagoshima prefecture, Japan August 9, 2015.  REUTERS/Issei Kato
TOKYO: Speeding up the restart of nuclear reactors halted in the wake of the Fukushima nuclear accident may be Japan's "best option" for riding out any oil and gas shortages that result from sanctions imposed on Russia, a senior ruling party lawmaker said on Tuesday (Mar 8).
Japan has repeatedly said that, in the event of a possible US-led embargo on Russian oil, it would work with the Group of Seven nations to respond appropriately. There has so far been no impact on its energy supply from the situation.
Such an embargo would have a large impact on Russia, but it would hit Japan hard as well, said Itsunori Onodera, a former defence minister and senior lawmaker in the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP).
"It's a question of whether we could endure this," he told Reuters in an interview.
Other natural gas and oil producers would have to step up to cover what Russia currently supplies to make this a viable option, he added. Japan relies on Russia for 5 per cent of its oil and about 8 per cent of its LNG. Russia is Japan's fifth-biggest supplier of crude oil and liquified natural gas (LNG).
An even better option would be hastening the restart of Japanese nuclear reactors, he added.
Many Japanese reactors are still going through a relicensing process under safety standards imposed after an earthquake and tsunami touched off meltdowns at the Fukushima nuclear plant.
"If we could have the nuclear reactors working, if we could speed that up, if you could obtain the understanding of the people after having verified safety - speeding up inspections and then speeding up the restarts, that's definitely a choice," he said.
Asked if this would be the best option in the event it faced fossil fuel shortages, he said "yes."
Japan currently has six operating nuclear reactors with a total capacity of 6,190 MW as opposed to 54 before Fukushima.
Fears of an energy war between Russia and the West grew on Tuesday after the United States pushed its allies to ban Russian oil imports as punishment for Moscow's invasion of Ukraine.
Russia warned it could stop the flow of gas through pipelines from Russia to Germany in response to Berlin's decision last month to halt the opening of the controversial new Nord Stream 2 pipeline. Russia supplies 40 per cent of Europe's gas.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a "special operation" that it says is not designed to occupy territory but to destroy its southern neighbour's military capabilities and capture what it regards as dangerous nationalists.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.