
      Thousands of Russians stuck in Thailand as sanctions kick in
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Tourists walk at the beach in Phuket, Thailand on Mar 8, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Jorge Silva)
BANGKOK: Thousands of tourists from Russia are currently stranded in Thailand, officials said on Tuesday (Mar 8), as unprecedented Western sanctions over the invasion of Ukraine put a squeeze on Russians struggling to find flights and finances.
Flight cancellations, a rouble currency in free-fall and payment problems from Russian banks being cut off from the global SWIFT system has left more than 7,000 Russians in limbo in locations like Phuket, Koh Samui, Pattaya and Krabi, Thailand's tourism authority chief said.
"We have to be good hosts and take care of everybody," Yuthasak Supasorn told Reuters.
"There are still Russian tourists on their way here," he added.
Russia's embassy in Bangkok did not immediately respond to request for comment on its citizens.
In 2019, Thailand received 1.4 million Russian visitors. In January, it counted about 23,000 Russians, representing about a fifth of the total arrivals.
About half of those stranded were on the island of Phuket.
"We've asked hotels to reduce prices and extend their stays," Phuket's tourism association president Bhummikitti Ruktaengam said.
Some visitors, when able, had used China's UnionPay after cards issued by Russian banks using US payment firms Visa and Mastercard stopped working, he said.
Visa and Mastercard announced on Saturday they were suspending operations in Russia over its invasion of Ukraine. Russia has called its actions there a "special operation".
Though Thailand was among 141 countries that backed a United Nations resolution calling for the immediate withdrawal of Russian troops, it has not imposed any sanctions on Moscow.
Bhummikitti said hundreds of people from Ukraine were also stranded, mainly due to airport closures there.
He said efforts were being made to get stranded Russians onto flights to Moscow on Middle Eastern airlines and to arrange repatriation flights.
A proposal was being considered to allow the use of cryptocurrency for payments at hotels, flights and other businesses in Phuket, he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.