
      Ukraine to pull troops and equipment from UN missions 
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A Ukrainian Mi-24 helicopter, serving in the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), flies near the town of Beni, Democratic Republic of Congo, Oct 22, 2018. Picture taken Oct 22, 2018. (Photo: Reuters/Oleksandr Klymenko)
GOMA, Democratic Republic of Congo: Ukraine will repatriate troops and equipment, including helicopters, involved in UN peacekeeping missions in Africa and Europe to bolster defences at home in the face of Russia's invasion, a UN official said.
Russian troops invaded Ukraine nearly two weeks ago, shelling, bombing and besieging its cities and towns and forcing more than 2 million people, mostly women and children, to flee.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy signed a decree on Tuesday (Mar 8) recalling all peacekeeping forces in order to assist in the war effort at home, Ukrainian media reported.
Ukraine contributes about 300 troops, police officers and staff to six UN missions, a number unlikely to drastically alter peacekeeping operations globally.
Its biggest contribution by far, to the mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo known as MONUSCO, comprises eight Ukrainian helicopters and a 250-member aviation unit, a MONUSCO spokesman said.
"We have received notification from Ukraine regarding the repatriation of their equipment and contributions to peacekeeping," the spokesman told Reuters, adding that the pullout included all UN missions with Ukrainian involvement.
"At the moment we are evaluating what impact this retreat could have on our mission and how we can minimise it."
Ukraine also contributes a dozen or fewer police officers and other staff to UN missions in Mali, South Sudan, Sudan, Cyprus and Kosovo, the UN peacekeeping website says.
Thousands of Ukrainian civilians and foreign volunteers have signed up to fight, and Western countries have contributed equipment, but Ukraine's military capabilities remain dwarfed by those of its giant neighbour.
MONUSCO has about 12,000 troops deployed, most in Congo's mineral-rich east, where dozens of militia groups are fighting for control of land and resources.
The Ukrainian helicopters are based in the eastern towns of Goma, Bunia, Bukavu and Beni, MONUSCO said.
Russia describes its offensive in Ukraine as a "special operation" designed to "demilitarise" and "denazify" Ukraine.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.