
      Britain plans to supply Ukraine with anti-aircraft missiles: Minister
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

British Secretary of State for Defence Ben Wallace walks outside Downing Street, in London, Britain, Feb 21, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Tom Nicholson)
LONDON: Britain is planning to supply Ukraine with anti-aircraft missiles to help it defend its skies from Russian invasion, defence minister Ben Wallace said, stressing that the technology fell within the definition of defensive weapons.
"It is vital ... that Ukraine maintains its ability to fly and suppress Russian air attack," Wallace told lawmakers.
"In response to Ukrainian requests, the government has taken the decision to explore the donation of STARStreak high-velocity man-portable anti-air missiles. We believe that this system will remain within the definition of defensive weapons, but will allow the Ukrainian force to better defend their skies."
Wallace said the decision had been taken in principle to supply the systems, and the government was working out how to get them into Ukraine and train Ukrainian forces to use them.
The STARStreak system is made by Thales.
If confirmed, the supply would mark a significant step in Britain's support for Ukraine. So far, Ukraine has praised Britain's contribution of thousands of anti-tank missiles which have helped slow the Russian advance on Kyiv.
However, Britain's support has been limited to defensive weaponry.
"Everything we do is bound by the decision to supply defensive systems, and are calibrated not to escalate to a strategic level," Wallace said.
As a member of the NATO military alliance, Britain has rejected pleas from Ukraine to impose a no-fly zone over the country. Britain says that could mean NATO forces shooting down Russian planes, resulting in a significant escalation of the conflict.
A proposed plan to allow Poland to donate fighter jets for use in Ukraine was rejected by the United States on Tuesday (Mar 8). Poland now says any supply of fighter jets to Ukraine must be done jointly by NATO countries.
Wallace said that was a matter for Poland.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.