
      Ukraine Embassy has received calls from people in Singapore interested in fighting Russian invasion: MHA
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Singapore
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Singapore
  

Over a million refugees have crossed into Poland since Russia invaded Ukraine on Feb 24  (Photo: AFP/Louisa Gouliamaki)
SINGAPORE: The Ukraine Embassy has received calls from people in Singapore who are interested in joining the International Legion for the Territorial Defense of Ukraine, said the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on Thursday (Mar 10).
But those who want to help Ukrainians should do so via legal channels, the ministry added in a statement.
"We would like to highlight that it is an offence for any person, whilst in Singapore, to wage, attempt to wage, or abet the waging of war, against the government of any power with which Singapore is not at war," said MHA.
"For citizens of Singapore, in particular, even if they commit these acts whilst outside Singapore, they will be legally deemed to have committed them as if in Singapore, and hence liable for an offence," the ministry said.
It urged members of the public who wish to help to do so via legal channels. This includes donating to legitimate organisations like the Singapore Red Cross, which is raising funds for humanitarian aid to support affected communities in Ukraine. 
Singapore has taken a clear stance on Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, MHA added.
"We strongly condemn the invasion. We have called upon Russia to cease hostilities, and respect the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Ukraine." 
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has publicly urged foreigners to "fight side-by-side" with Ukrainians against Russian forces to show support for his country. 
Last week, Zelenskyy said more than 16,000 foreigners had volunteered, without specifying how many had arrived. 
More than 2 million people have fled Ukraine since Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered an invasion on Feb 24. Moscow calls its action a "special military operation" to disarm its neighbour. 
Most of those who have fled are women and children, as able-bodied men have been ordered by Kyiv to stay home to fight. 
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.