
      Putin says Russia will solve its problems, calls sanctions illegitimate
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Russian President Vladimir Putin attends a meeting with government members via a video link in Moscow, Russia Mar 10, 2022. Sputnik/Mikhail Klimentyev/Kremlin via REUTERS
Russian President Vladimir Putin said on Thursday (Mar 10) that Western sanctions were illegitimate and Russia would calmly solve the problems arising from them.
Addressing a government meeting, Putin also said Moscow - a major energy producer which supplies a third of Europe's gas - would continue to meet its contractual obligations.
Speaking calmly, the Kremlin leader acknowledged that sanctions imposed since the start of what Russia calls its special military operation in Ukraine were being felt.
"It is clear that at such moments people's demand for certain groups of goods always increases, but we have no doubt that we will solve all these problems while working in a calm fashion," he said.
"Gradually, people will orient themselves, they will understand that there are simply no events that we cannot close off and solve."
He also said that Russia would ultimately emerge stronger and more independent after overcoming the difficulties caused by what he called the West's illegitimate sanctions.
Putin said there had been no alternative to its "special military operation" in Ukraine and that Russia was not a country that could accept compromising its sovereignty for some sort of short-term economic gain.
"These sanctions would have been imposed in any case," Putin said during the meeting. 
"There are some questions, problems and difficulties but in the past we have overcome them and we will overcome them."
Speaking at the same meeting, Finance Minister Anton Siluanov said Russia had taken measures to limit the outflow of capital and that the country would service its external debts in roubles.
"Over the last two weeks Western countries have in essence waged an economic and financial war against Russia," he said.
He said the West had defaulted on its obligations to Russia by freezing its gold and foreign currency reserves. It was trying to halt foreign trade, he said.
"In these conditions, the priority is for us to stabilise the situation in the financial system," Siluanov said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.