
      Ukraine says Russian troops at gas compressor stations pose supply risk
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

3D printed Natural Gas Pipes are placed on displayed Russia's and Ukraine's flags in this illustration taken, Jan 31, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Dado Ruvic/Illustration)
LVIV: The arrival of Russian troops at two gas compressor stations in eastern Ukraine poses a risk to European supplies, Ukraine's gas pipeline operator warned on Thursday (Mar 10), although there were no signs of an immediate impact on flows.
Russia said compressor stations at Novopskov in the Luhansk region and Kupiansk near Kharkiv were under its control, and it guaranteed the safety of all operations and equipment.
Russia is the European Union's top gas supplier and its invasion of Ukraine has sharpened concerns about supply disruptions, sending gas prices soaring.
Some 41.6 billion cubic metres (bcm) of Russian gas was transported through Ukraine to Europe in 2021, making it a key supply route, although that was down 25 per cent on the year before as Moscow looks for alternatives.
Gas supplies into Slovakia from Ukraine via the Velke Kapusany border point were stable at the time of writing, according to transmission system operator data.
Ukraine's gas pipeline operator OGTSU said attempts by Russian forces to enter the two stations created significant risks for the safety of personnel and continuity of gas transportation.
"There is a real danger to (gas) transit," OGTSU chief Sergiy Makogon told Reuters.
"Our intention is to continue gas flows, as we have proven over the last 2 weeks," OGTSU said on Twitter. "If there are any interruptions/shortages of gas in Europe, please explain to your constituents who is at fault."
Russian deputy energy minister Pavel Sorokin said on Wednesday Moscow intended to meet all of its gas obligations and continue supplies in full.
"Full safety of operations and protection of the equipment is guaranteed," he said on Thursday, referring to the Novopskov and Kupiansk compressor stations.
At the first high-level talks between Russia and Ukraine since Moscow invaded on Feb 24, Ukrainian Foreign Minister Dmytro Kuleba said Russia must immediately pull back its troops from occupied gas and nuclear energy facilities.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a "special operation" that it says is not designed to occupy territory but to destroy its southern neighbour's military capabilities and capture what it regards as dangerous nationalists.
 
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.