
      Russian forces hit Ukrainian psychiatric hospital: Regional governor
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A view of a destroyed hospital building, amid Russia's ongoing invasion of Ukraine, in Izyum, Ukraine, Mar 8, 2022, in this picture obtained from social media. Volodymyr Matsokin via Facebook/via REUTERS
LVIV, Ukraine: Ukraine accused Russian forces of hitting a psychiatric hospital near the eastern Ukrainian town of Izyum on Friday (Mar 11) in what the regional governor called "a brutal attack on civilians".
The attack caused no casualties, Ukraine’s State Emergencies Service said in a statement.
"All 30 staff and 330 patients were in a bomb shelter at the time of the strike," it said.
"This is a war crime against civilians, genocide against the Ukrainian nation," Oleh Synegubov, governor of the Kharkiv region wrote on the Telegram messaging app.
Reuters was unable immediately to verify the report in an area that has reported heavy fighting since Russian forces invaded Ukraine on Feb 24. Russia has denied targeting civilians in what it calls a "special operation" to disarm and "de-Nazify" Ukraine.
The reported attack followed the bombardment of a hospital in the southern city of Mariupol in which Ukrainian officials said three people were killed on Wednesday, including a child. Russia has said it will look into the incident but some officials dismissed reports of the attack as "fake news".
Synegubov said separately that Russian forces had shelled residential areas of Kharkiv, the main city in the region, 89 times in one day but that there was no danger to civilians after an institute containing a nuclear laboratory was hit.
An advisor to the Ukrainian Interior Ministry had said on Thursday that Russian planes bombed the institute in Kharkiv that is home to an experimental nuclear reactor.
"There are no threats to the civilian population yet," Synegubov said in a video address.
All Ukrainian nuclear power stations are operating stably but staff in the Zaporizhzhia plant are facing "psychological pressure" at work following its capture by Russian forces, the Ukrainian state nuclear company Energoatom said.
Radiation levels at all plants had not changed, it said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.