
      US rushing US$200 million worth of weapons for Ukraine's defence against Russia
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

US President Joe Biden arrives aboard Air Force One at Philadelphia International Airport in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania on Mar 11, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Jonathan Ernst)
WASHINGTON: The United States on Saturday (Mar 12) said it would rush up to US$200 million in additional small arms, anti-tank and anti-aircraft weapons to Ukraine, as Ukrainian officials pleaded for more equipment to defend against heavy shelling by Russian forces.
President Joe Biden on Saturday authorised the additional security assistance, the White House said, paving the way for the "immediate" shipment of fresh military equipment to Ukraine, a senior administration official said.
Biden's decision brings total US security aid provided to Ukraine to US$1.2 billion since January 2021, and to US$3.2 billion since 2014, when Russia annexed the Crimea region of Ukraine, according to senior administration officials.
In a memorandum to Secretary of State Antony Blinken, Biden directed that up to US$200 million allocated through the Foreign Assistance Act be designated for Ukraine's defense.
Blinken said he had authorised a fourth drawdown of US defense stocks, in line with Biden's directive, "to help Ukraine meet the armored, airborne, and other threats it is facing" as the war entered a third week.
He lauded the "great skill, iron will and profound courage" being shown by the Ukrainian armed forces and citizens, and said the United States would also continue to provide humanitarian assistance to those in need.
"The United States and our allies and partners stand in solidarity with the people and government of Ukraine in the face of the Kremlin’s aggression," he said in a statement. "The international community is united and determined to hold (Russian President Vladimir) Putin accountable."
Russia says it is engaged in a "special military operation" that it says is not designed to occupy territory but to destroy its neighbour's military capabilities and "de-Nazify" Ukraine.
The funds "will provide immediate military assistance to Ukraine, including anti-armor, anti-aircraft systems, and small arms in support of Ukraine’s front-line defenders", one of the US officials said, speaking on condition of anonymity.
Ukraine has been asking for more Javelin anti-tank weapons and Stinger missiles to shoot down aircraft.
Ukraine's foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, on Saturday underscored Ukraine's need for additional military supplies in an interview with the non-profit Renew Democracy Initiative.
The United States has drawn from US weapons stocks to supply Ukraine repeatedly, beginning in the fall of 2021 and then again in December and February.
The last batch of US weapons provided in February included anti-armor, small arms, body armor and various munitions, according to the Pentagon, as well as anti-aircraft systems.
On Thursday night the US Congress approved US$13.6 billion in emergency aid for Ukraine as part of a YS$1.5 trillion measure to fund the US government through September. 
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.