
      Squatters occupy Russian oligarch's London mansion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A man gestures as he and other squatters occupy a mansion reportedly belonging to Russian billionaire Oleg Deripaska, who was placed on Britain's sanctions list last week, in Belgravia, London, Britain, March 14, 2022. REUTERS/Peter Nicholls
LONDON: Squatters have occupied the London mansion suspected of belonging to Russian billionaire Oleg Deripaska, who was placed on Britain's sanctions list last week, unfurling a Ukrainian flag and a banner saying "This property has been liberated".
Police said they were called in the early hours of Monday (Mar 14) after it was reported that the squatters had entered the multi-million pound mansion in Belgrave Square, in an upmarket area of the British capital which is home to numerous foreign embassies.
"By occupying this mansion, we want to show solidarity with the people of Ukraine, but also the people of Russia who never agreed to this madness," said a statement from squatters, who described themselves as anarchists.
"You occupy Ukraine, we occupy you," the statement said.
A number of people gained entry and hung banners from upstairs windows, the police said in a statement. The police did not say who reported the incident.
Britain froze the assets of Deripaska last Thursday, one of a number of Russian oligarchs targeted in the wake of Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which the Kremlin has called a "special military operation".
Deripaska, who has stakes in En+ Group, a major extractives and energy company which owns UC Rusal, one of the world's major aluminium producers, is worth an estimated £2 billion (US$2.62 billion) and has a multi-million pound property portfolio in Britain, the British government said at the time.
Britain says Deripaska is closely associated with the government of Russia and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
London High Court documents from 2007 identified Deripaska as the beneficial owner of the Belgrave Square mansion. A judge in a court case the year before said the property and another house he owned outside the capital, were then worth about £40 million.
Representatives of Deripaska did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Shortly before the sanctions were imposed, Deripaska said peace was needed as soon as possible in Ukraine and warned that Russia would be different after the conflict.
In their statement, the squatters said the mansion would "serve as a centre for refugee support" and that other properties would also be targeted.
Britain has sanctioned around 20 Russian oligarchs, including Roman Abramovich and Alisher Usmanov, freezing their properties across London and banning them from coming to Britain.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.