
      Three EU country leaders arrive in Kyiv in show of support for Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Rescuers work next to a residential building damaged by shelling, as Russia's attack on Ukraine continues, in Kyiv, Ukraine, in this handout picture released on Mar 15, 2022. (Photo: Press service of the State Emergency Service of Ukraine/Handout via Reuters)
PRAGUE: The prime ministers of the Czech Republic, Poland and Slovenia arrived in Kyiv by train on Tuesday (Mar 15) to show support for Ukraine, the first foreign leaders to visit the capital since Russia invaded last month.
Russian air strikes and shelling hit Kyiv on Tuesday killing at least four people, authorities said, as invading forces tightened their grip and the mayor announced a 35-hour curfew starting at 8pm.
Polish Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki, Czech counterpart Petr Fiala and Slovenia's Janez Jansa were to meet Ukrainian officials. Also in attendance was Polish Deputy Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski, leader of the country's ruling PiS party, who is seen as the main decision-maker in the country.
"It is here, in war-torn Kyiv, that history is being made. It is here, that freedom fights against the world of tyranny. It is here that the future of us all hangs in the balance," Morawiecki wrote on Twitter.
The Czech Republic and Poland, former communist members of both the EU and NATO, have been among the strongest backers of Ukraine in Europe since the Russian invasion.
Nearly three weeks into a war which Western countries say Moscow believed it would win within days, Europe's biggest invasion force since World War II has been halted at the gates of Kyiv, with major road and train routes from the capital still open.
Huge armoured columns of Russian forces have failed to capture any of Ukraine's 10 biggest cities, despite bombardment that has reduced some residential areas to rubble.
Hosting foreign dignitaries in his own capital would be a remarkable symbolic success for Zelenskyy, who rejected offers to evacuate early in the war, staying under bombardment to rally his nation with nightly messages from inside the city.
In his most confident public statement yet, Zelenskyy called on Russian forces to surrender, saying they and their officers already knew that the war was hopeless.
"Russian conscripts! Listen to me very carefully. Russian officers! You’ve already understood everything: You will not take anything from Ukraine. You will take lives. There are a lot of you. But your life will also be taken. But why should you die? What for? I know that you want to survive,” he said.
Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmygal hailed what he said was the "courage of true friends" and said the leaders would discuss support for Ukraine and further sanctions against Russia.
Morawiecki's top aide Michal Dworczyk told private broadcaster Polsat News on Tuesday evening that the three prime ministers had started a meeting with Shmygal and President Volodymyr Zelenskiy.
Polish state-run broadcaster TVP Info reported that Morawiecki and Kaczynski also went to meet the Kyiv authorities, without giving further details.
Fiala said the decision to visit Kyiv was taken in consultation with European Council President Charles Michel and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen.
The idea of the trip was agreed at an EU leaders' summit in Versailles in France last week, Dworczyk said.
But an EU official said there was no "formal mandate" extended by Brussels.
"It's a very valid initiative. Every initiative to bring peace back to Ukraine is of course welcome," the official said. "Some leaders might also wonder: will this jeopardise or will this improve conditions for negotiations with the Russians. It remains to be seen, of course. It's a fine line."
Russia calls its actions a "special military operation" to "denazify" Ukraine, which Kyiv and its Western allies reject as a pretext for an unjustified and illegal attack
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.