
      Ukraine hopes to open 9 humanitarian corridors, get aid to besieged Mariupol
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A still image taken from drone footage obtained from social media shows damaged residential buildings in Mariupol on Mar 14, 2022, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine. (Screengrab: Reuters/Azov Regiment Press Service)
LVIV, Ukraine: Ukraine hopes to open nine corridors on Tuesday (Mar 15) to evacuate civilians trapped by Russian forces and will try to deliver humanitarian supplies to the besieged port of Mariupol, said Deputy Prime Minister Iryna Vereshchuk.
Hundreds of thousands of residents of Mariupol, which has been under constant bombardment, have sheltered in basements and the ruins of buildings without water or power for more than a week. Moscow on Monday allowed the first convoy to escape.
"In the first two hours, 160 cars left," Andrei Rempel, a representative of the Mariupol city council, told Reuters.
Local authorities say that anywhere between 2,300 and 20,000 civilians have died so far in Russian shelling in the city, a toll that could not be independently confirmed.
Two powerful explosions rocked the capital Kyiv before dawn on Tuesday. Emergency services said that two people died when an apartment building in Kyiv was attacked.
Air raid sirens sounded in several regions including Odessa, Chernihiv, Cherkasy and Smila.
The death toll from Monday's air strike on a TV tower in northern Ukraine rose to at least 19, said Vitaliy Koval, the governor of the northern region of Rivne.
Further talks between Ukrainian and Russian negotiators to ease the crisis were expected on Tuesday after discussions on Monday via video ended with no new progress announced.
Thousands have been killed in intense fighting and bombardments since Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the invasion of Ukraine on Feb 24.
Russia calls its actions a "special military operation" to "denazify" the country and prevent genocide, a claim that the United States and its allies reject as a pretext for an unjustified and illegal attack.
RUSSIA-CHINA RELATIONS
The United States has warned China against providing military or financial help to Moscow after its invasion of Ukraine.
Moscow denies making any such request, saying that it has sufficient resources to fulfil all of its aims, while China has labelled the reports on assistance as "disinformation".
According to US officials, Russia has asked for military and economic support from Beijing, which signalled a willingness to provide aid.
"We have communicated very clearly to Beijing that we won't stand by," State Department spokesperson Ned Price told reporters after US national security adviser Jake Sullivan met China's top diplomat Yang Jiechi in Rome. "We will not allow any country to compensate Russia for its losses."
The seven-hour meeting was "intense" and reflected "the gravity of the moment", according to a US official.
In Russia, a rare anti-war protest occurred in a studio during the main news programme on state TV's Channel One, which is the primary source of news for millions of Russians and closely follows the Kremlin line.
A woman held up a sign in English and Russian that said: "NO WAR. Stop the war. Don't believe propaganda. They are lying to you here."
Britain's defence ministry said that Russia could be planning to use chemical or biological weapons in Ukraine in response to a staged fake attack on Russian troops, without citing evidence. US officials have made similar statements.
Russia has accused Ukraine of planning to use biological weapons. The United Nations last Friday said that it had no evidence Kyiv had such a programme.
At the disabled Chernobyl nuclear reactor, power had been restored after damage forced the plant to rely on electricity from diesel generators, Ukraine 24 reported on Tuesday.
The UN says that more than 2.8 million people have now left Ukraine since the start of the war.
"I am fleeing with my child because I want my child to stay alive," said a Ukrainian woman named Tanya who said that she travelled from the town of Mykolaiv in southern Ukraine across the Danube river to Romania. "Because the people that are there now are Russians, Russian soldiers, and they kill children."
Russia says that it does not target civilians.
FURTHER SANCTIONS
European Union member states agreed on Monday to a fourth package of sanctions against Russia, according to France.
Details were not officially disclosed, but diplomatic sources said that they would include an import ban on Russian steel and iron, an export ban on luxury goods and a ban on investment in the energy sector.
Chelsea football team owner Roman Abramovich and 14 others would be added to the EU blacklist, the sources said.
A jet linked to Abramovich landed in Moscow early on Tuesday, after taking off from Istanbul following a brief stop there, plane tracking data showed.
Japan on Tuesday announced an asset freeze for 17 Russian individuals, including 11 members of the Russian Duma, or parliament, five family members of banker Yuri Kovalchuk, as well as billionaire Viktor Vekselberg after similar US moves.
Western-led sanctions have cut Russia off from key parts of global financial markets and have frozen nearly half of the country's US$640 billion gold and foreign exchange reserves, triggering the worst economic crisis since the 1991 fall of the Soviet Union.
Russia's finance ministry said that it is preparing to service some of its foreign currency debt on Wednesday, but such payments will be made in roubles if sanctions prevent banks from honouring debts in the currency of issue.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.