
      China says Taiwan 'taking advantage' of Ukraine as island sends more aid
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

People attend a rally against Russia's invasion of Ukraine in Taipei, Taiwan, Mar 13, 2022. (File photo: REUTERS/Ann Wang)
BEIJING: China's government on Wednesday (Mar 16) lambasted Taiwan's humanitarian aid for Ukraine and sanctions on Russia as "taking advantage of other's difficulties" after the island announced it was sending more funds donated by the public for refugees.
The war in Ukraine has garnered broad sympathy in Taiwan, with many seeing parallels between Russia's invasion and the military threat posed by China, which views the democratically governed island as its own territory.
Taiwan has joined in Western-led sanctions on Russia.
Asked about Taiwan's aid and sanctions at a news conference in Beijing, Zhu Fenglian, a spokesperson for China's Taiwan Affairs Office, said Taiwan's government was trying to latch onto the issue for its own purposes.
"The Democratic Progressive Party authorities are using the Ukraine issue to validate their existence and piggy back on a hot issue, taking advantage of other's difficulties," she said, referring to Taiwan's ruling party.
"Their attempts to incite confrontation and create hostility through political manipulation will not succeed."
Taiwan's government says that on Ukraine it has a duty to stand with other democracies.
Late on Tuesday, Taiwan's Foreign Ministry announced a second US$11.5 million donation to help refugees after an initial donation this month of US$3.5 million. President Tsai Ing-wen has gifted one month of her salary.
"During this conflict, the Taiwanese people have shown boundless compassion," the ministry cited Foreign Minister Joseph Wu as saying at an event attended by several senior Taipei-based Western diplomats, including the de facto European Union ambassador.
China, which has refused to condemn the Russian invasion, said last week the Chinese Red Cross would provide humanitarian assistance worth 5 million yuan (US$786,000) to Ukraine, its first publicly announced aid to the country since the war.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.