
      Ukraine President Zelenskyy to seek more help in speech to US Congress
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

In this image from video provided by the Ukrainian Presidential Press Office and posted on Facebook Tuesday, Mar 15, 2022, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy speaks in Kyiv, Ukraine. (Photo: Ukrainian Presidential Press Office/AP)
WASHINGTON: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Wednesday (Mar 16) is set to make an urgent appeal to the US Congress for more help in fending off a Russian invasion that has brought death and destruction and sent a wave of refugees fleeing his country.
Zelenskyy's virtual address to members of the House of Representatives and Senate, scheduled for 9am EDT (9pm, Singapore time), comes a day after he made a plea to Canada's parliament for more Western sanctions on Russia and the imposition of a no-fly zone over Ukraine.
A no-fly zone is a step that US President Joe Biden and NATO allies have resisted out of a fear of escalating the war that began with Russia's Feb 24 invasion.
Biden on Tuesday signed into law US$13.6 billion in emergency aid to Ukraine to help it obtain more weaponry and for humanitarian assistance.
Zelenskyy has sought in recent weeks to shore up support for his country in various speeches to foreign audiences, also including the European Parliament and the British Parliament.
Support for Ukraine is a rare instance in which Republicans and Democrats have aligned in a sharply divided Congress, with some lawmakers in both parties urging Biden to go further in helping Ukraine. There is some bipartisan support in Congress for rushing combat aircraft to Ukraine.
Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell on Tuesday told reporters he does not expect Zelenskyy to ask for direct US engagement or for a no-fly zone, which could require NATO forces to fire on Russian aircraft.
"But there are a lot of weapons that are extremely effective at controlling the air," McConnell said, citing warplanes that Poland has offered to provide Ukraine.
The speech will be broadcast live, unlike a private conversation Zelenskyy held on Mar 5 with US lawmakers during which he made a plea for aircraft to help Ukraine fend off aerial attacks by Russia.
"We are not asking for much. We are asking for justice, for real support," Zelenskyy told Canadian lawmakers on Tuesday.
The United Nations estimates that around three million people have fled Ukraine, mostly women and children, and are seeking safety in neighbouring countries, mainly Poland.
Biden has announced a ban on Russian oil and other energy imports and has called for a suspension of Russia's trading status that affords its exported products lower tariffs in the international arena.
The House is attempting to pass legislation responding to Biden's request this week.
HISTORIC VISITS
It is rare for foreign leaders to address the US Congress during wartime. A famous example came in 1941, when British Prime Minister Winston Churchill spoke to Congress just weeks after Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor that drew the United States into World War II. Churchill warned that "many disappointments and unpleasant surprises await us".
In 2015, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu delivered a speech to Congress opposing an international deal aimed at discouraging Iran from developing nuclear weapons as the matter was being debated in Washington.
The first foreign leader to address a joint meeting of Congress was King Kalakaua of Hawaii in 1874, before Hawaii became a state.
Following the breakup of the Soviet Union, Russian President Boris Yeltsin in 1992 addressed Congress. Yeltsin's upbeat speech proclaimed: "We have left behind the period when America and Russia looked at each other through gun sights, ready to pull the trigger at any time."
But the sanctions leveled by the United States and its allies against Russia following the invasion and moves to shore up Ukraine's military capability have brought back memories of the decades-long Cold War between the United States and Soviet Union to which Yeltsin had referred.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.