
      World Court to rule on emergency measures in Ukraine vs Russia case
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A view shows a residential building damaged by shelling, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in Kyiv, Ukraine, in this picture released on Mar 16, 2022.  (Photo: State Emergency Service of Ukraine/Handout via Reuters)
THE HAGUE: The International Court of Justice (ICJ) is set to rule on Wednesday (Mar 16) on emergency measures sought by Ukraine in a case against Russia, including an order for Moscow to stop its military campaign.
The decision by the top United Nations court, also known as the "World Court", will be read out in The Hague's Peace Palace at 4pm local time (11pm, Singapore time). 
Although the court's rulings are binding, it has no direct means of enforcing them and in rare cases, countries have ignored them, in the past.
Ukraine filed its case shortly after Russia's invasion began on Feb 24, saying that Russia's apparent justification, that it was acting to prevent a genocide in Eastern Ukraine, is unfounded.
At the hearings, Ukraine said there is no threat of genocide in Eastern Ukraine, and the UN's 1948 Genocide Convention, which both countries have signed, does not allow an invasion to prevent one.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has described the invasion as a "special military action" needed "to protect people who have been subjected to bullying and genocide" - meaning those whose first or only language is Russian - in eastern Ukraine.
Russia said it skipped World Court hearings on Mar 7 "in light of the apparent absurdity of the lawsuit".
However, Moscow did file a written document with the court saying the ICJ should not impose any measures.
Russia argued that Putin's use of the word "genocide" does not automatically imply that it is basing its actions on the Genocide Convention. Without a dispute over the interpretation of the treaty, the court has no jurisdiction, Russia argued.
In an urgent situation the court can order emergency measures in a matter of days, even before it decides on whether it has jurisdiction in a case. That usually takes many months, while decisions on the actual merits of a case takes years.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.