
      Biden calls Putin a 'war criminal', sending more weapons to Ukraine 
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

US President Joe Biden speaks about assistance the US government is providing to Ukraine before signing an executive order on the aide in the Eisenhower Office Building's South Court Auditorium at the White House in Washington, on Mar 16, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Tom Brenner)
WASHINGTON: President Joe Biden on Wednesday (Mar 16) said Russian President Vladimir Putin "is a war criminal" for attacking Ukraine and announced an additional US$800 million in security assistance including weapons to take down Russian planes and tanks.
In an exchange with a reporter at the White House, Biden said, "Oh I think he is a war criminal," after initially responding with a "no" to a question about whether he was ready to call Putin that.
That is the first time Biden has publicly branded Putin with that phrase. Last week, during a trip to Poland, Vice President Harris said Russia should "absolutely" be investigated for potential war crimes.
White House press secretary Jen Psaki later said Biden was speaking from his heart, noting there is a separate legal process to determine whether Putin has violated international law and committed war crimes, and that that process currently is underway at the State Department.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Biden's characterisation of Putin was "unacceptable and unforgivable rhetoric", Tass news agency said.
Earlier in the day, Biden said the United States has offered Ukraine US$1 billion in security aid, addressing Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's urgent appeal to the US Congress for military help to fend off the Russian invasion. The US will continue to give Ukraine weapons to fight and defend themselves, offer humanitarian relief and support Ukraine's economy with additional financial assistance, he added.
"This new package on its own is going to provide unprecedented assistance to Ukraine, and includes 800 anti-aircraft systems," Biden said, to halt attacks on Ukrainians by Russian planes and helicopters.
At Zelenskyy's request, Washington will help Ukraine acquire additional long-range missile anti-aircraft systems, Biden said. It will also supply 9,000 anti-armour systems, drones and 7,000 small arms such as machine guns, shotguns and grenade launchers that will help civilians fighting to defend their country.
"More will be coming as we source additional stocks of equipment that ... we are ready to transfer," he said.
The new funds will come from a spending bill Biden signed into law that includes US$13.6 billion in new aid to Ukraine.
In his address to Congress, Zelenskyy compared the attacks in Ukraine to the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor that pulled the United States into World War Two, and begged lawmakers, and Biden directly, for more help.
"This is a terror that Europe has not seen for 80 years, and we are asking for our life, for an answer to this terror from the whole world. Is this a lot to ask for? To create a no-fly zone over Ukraine to save people?" Zelenskyy asked through an interpreter.
"If this is too much to ask, we offer an alternative," he said. "You know what kind of defense systems we need," adding that he knows the United States has them.
Biden has referred to the creation of a no-fly zone over Ukraine as "World War Three," and the Pentagon has refused requests to send fighter jets to Ukraine.
Earlier on Wednesday, Russia and Ukraine both emphasised newfound scope for compromise as peace talks were set to resume three weeks into a Russian assault that has so far failed to topple the Ukrainian government.
On Tuesday, the White House said Biden will travel to Brussels for a Mar 24 NATO summit on Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which Moscow terms a "special military operation" to disarm and "denazify" its neighbor.
Biden has ratcheted up sanctions imposed on Russia in recent days. He has called for a suspension of Russia's trading status that affords its exported products lower tariffs in the international arena and announced a ban on Russian oil and other energy imports.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.