
      China 'on the right side of history' over Ukraine war, says foreign minister
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi poses for a picture prior to meeting United States Secretary of State Antony Blinken on the sidelines of the Group of Twenty summit in Rome on Oct 31, 2021. (File photo: Reuters/Tiziana Fabi)
SHANGHAI: China stands on the right side of history over the Ukraine crisis as time will tell, and its position is in line with the wishes of most countries, Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said.
"China will never accept any external coercion or pressure, and opposes any unfounded accusations and suspicions against China," Wang told reporters on Saturday (Mar 19) evening, according to a statement published by his ministry on Sunday.
Wang's comments came after United States President Joe Biden warned his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, on Friday of "consequences" if Beijing gave material support to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
During a video call, Xi told Biden the war in Ukraine must end as soon as possible and called on North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) nations to hold a dialogue with Moscow. He did not, however, assign blame to Russia, according to Beijing's statements about the call.
Wang said that the most important message Xi sent was that China has always been a force for maintaining world peace.
"We have always stood for maintaining peace and opposing war," Wang said, reiterating that China will make independent judgements.
"China's position is objective and fair, and is in line with the wishes of most countries. Time will prove that China's claims are on the right side of history."
Also on Saturday, Vice Foreign Minister Le Yucheng said that sanctions imposed by Western nations on Russia over Ukraine were increasingly "outrageous".
The United States and its European and Asian allies have imposed sweeping sanctions on Russia for the Feb 24 invasion of its neighbour, which they call a war of aggression by President Vladimir Putin. He says he launched a "special operation" to demilitarise and "denazify" Ukraine.
While saying it recognises Ukraine's sovereignty, Beijing has repeatedly said that Russia has legitimate security concerns that should be addressed and urged a diplomatic solution to the conflict.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.