
      Pope says 'slaughters and atrocities' committed daily in Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Pope Francis holds the weekly general audience at the Paul VI Hall at the Vatican, Mar 2, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Guglielmo Mangiapane)
VATICAN CITY: Pope Francis, continuing his implicit criticism of Russia, called the conflict in Ukraine an unjustified "senseless massacre" and urged leaders to stop "this repugnant war".
"The violent aggression against Ukraine is unfortunately not slowing down," he told about 30,000 people in St Peter's Square for his weekly Sunday (Mar 20) address and blessing.
"It is a senseless massacre where every day slaughters and atrocities are being repeated," Francis said in his latest strong condemnation of the war, which has so far avoided mentioning Russia by name.
"There is no justification for this," he added.
Moscow says the action it launched on Feb 24 is a "special military operation" designed not to occupy territory but to demilitarise its neighbour and purge it what it sees as dangerous nationalists. Francis has already rejected that terminology.
"I beg all the players in the international community to truly commit themselves to stopping this repugnant war," the pope said, drawing loud cheers and applause from the crowd.
"Even this week missiles and bombs hit civilians, the elderly, children and pregnant mothers," he said.
Russia denies targeting civilians.
Francis spoke about his visit on Saturday to a Rome hospital that is treating children wounded in Ukraine.
"One was missing an arm and another had a head wound," he said.
Francis also asked people to guard against the potential human trafficking of those fleeing Ukraine.
"Let's think about these women, these children ... who are without work, separated from their husbands. They will be sought by the 'vultures' of society. Please. Let's protect them," he said.
Poland has seen indications that human traffickers may be targeting refugees fleeing the Ukraine war, officials and aid workers have said. Some preventative efforts have been put in place.
The city of Berlin has warned Ukrainian refugees not to accept offers of money or accommodation at the main train station due to concerns that they might be lured into forced prostitution or other forms of human trafficking.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.