
      UN General Assembly likely to vote again this week on Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A Ukrainian service member walks, as the Russian invasion continues, in a destroyed village on the front line in the east Kyiv region, Ukraine, on Mar 21, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Gleb Garanich)
UNITED NATIONS: The United Nations General Assembly is expected to vote this week, diplomats said, to call out Russia's invasion of Ukraine for creating a "dire" humanitarian situation, urge aid access and again demand Moscow stop fighting and withdraw its troops.
It will be the second time the 193-member General Assembly votes on the Ukraine crisis since Russia launched what it calls a "special military operation" on Feb 24 to destroy Ukraine's military infrastructure.
Ukraine, the United States and allies are looking to improve on the 141 yes votes cast to adopt a Mar 2 General Assembly resolution that deplored Russia's "aggression against Ukraine." Russia, Belarus, Eritrea, North Korea and Syria voted no, while 35 states - including China - abstained.
However, diplomats said South Africa has proposed a rival draft text on Ukraine's humanitarian situation. The draft, seen by Reuters, makes no reference to Russia. It was not immediately clear whether South Africa planned to put it to a vote. South Africa's UN mission did not respond to a request for comment.
General Assembly resolutions are nonbinding, but they carry political weight. The Mar 2 vote illustrated Russia's international isolation over its invasion of Ukraine. While Russia is a veto power in the 15-member UN Security Council, no one country can block a General Assembly resolution.
The draft resolution put forward by Ukraine and allies for a likely vote this week focuses on the humanitarian situation - demanding the protection of civilians, medical personnel, aid workers, journalists, hospitals and other civilian infrastructure.
Ukraine and Western allies have accused Moscow of attacking civilians indiscriminately. Moscow denies attacking civilians.
The Ukraine and allies draft resolution, seen by Reuters, also demands an end to the siege of cities, in particular Mariupol.
Ukraine defied Moscow's demand for its soldiers to lay down arms before dawn on Monday in besieged Mariupol where hundreds of thousands of civilians are cowering from Russian bombardments laying waste to their city.
The second General Assembly vote comes after France and Mexico drafted a similar Security Council resolution, but did not call a vote because they said Moscow would have blocked it. Russia then put forward its own draft council text, but pulled it from a planned vote last week.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.