
      Ukraine president Zelenskyy insists on meeting with Putin
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy speaks during an address from Kyiv, Ukraine Mar 4, 2022. (File photo: Courtesy of Ukrainian Presidential Press Service/Handout via REUTERS)
KYIV: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Monday (Mar 21) that it would not be possible to negotiate an end to the war in his country without meeting Kremlin leader Vladimir Putin.
Zelenskyy told European public television networks such a meeting could discuss the future of occupied Ukrainian territory, but more time would be required to resolve the issue.
He also repeated his acknowledgement made earlier this month that Ukraine could not now secure NATO membership.
"I believe that until such time as we have a meeting with the president of the Russian Federation...you cannot truly understand what they are prepared to do in order to stop the war and what they are prepared to do if we are not ready for this or that compromise," Zelenskyy said in the interview.
Zelenskyy has sought a meeting with Putin for nearly a year, but the Russian leader has refused and instead demanded the Ukrainian president resolve his country's "civil war" with separatist territories linked to Moscow.
Since Russian troops poured into Ukraine last month, Zelenskyy has issued increasingly urgent calls for talks to end the fighting.
Last week he called for a meeting quickly so that Russia could "limit the losses caused by its mistakes".
'COMPROMISE MUST BE FOUND'
Russia's assault on Ukraine has killed thousands and driven almost a quarter of Ukraine's 44 million people from their homes. Germany predicted the refugee number could reach as high as 10 million in coming weeks.
"I am ready at a meeting with the president of Russia to raise the issue of occupied territories, but I am certain that a solution will not come at this meeting," Zelenskyy said in his interview.
He said several conditions would need to be met before such matters could be dealt with, namely, a cease-fire, the withdrawal of troops and security guarantees.
"If people are trying to stop a war, there is a cease-fire and troops are withdrawn. The presidents meet, reach an agreement on withdrawing troops and there are security guarantees of one sort or another," he said. "Compromises must be found, one way or another of guaranteeing our security."
Zelenskyy said Ukraine is well aware it cannot be admitted into NATO now. NATO member states, Zelenskyy said, "understand that they do not want to fight with Russia and therefore cannot take us in...we have to reconcile ourselves to that and say 'ok, other guarantees'."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.