
      Ukrainian president urges Italy to seize mystery yacht
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy appears on a screen as he addresses the Italian parliament via videolink, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in Rome, Italy, on Mar 22, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Remo Casilli/Pool)
ROME: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy urged Italy on Tuesday (Mar 22) to seize a mystery yacht worth about US$700 million that has been linked to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
In an address to the Italian parliament, Zelenskyy said Putin and his wealthy backers often went to Italy on holiday and should have all their assets frozen to put pressure on them to end the invasion of Ukraine.
"Don't be a resort for murderers. Block all their real estate, accounts and yachts - from the Scheherazade to the smallest ones," he said, referring to a superyacht that is moored in the Italian port of Marina di Carrara.
The sleek, six-deck vessel has two helicopter landing pads and can host up 18 guests and 40 crew. Its owner has never been publicly identified, but there have been insistent rumours in the media that it belongs to Putin or a member of his inner circle.
An organisation set up by the imprisoned Alexei Navalny, a fierce Putin critic, released a report on Monday saying it had evidence that the boat belonged to the Russian leader.
It said many of its crew were drawn from Russia's Federal Protective Service (FSO), which is tasked with protecting the Russian president, and regularly flew to Italy.
The Kremlin did not immediately respond to a request for a comment on whether Putin was the owner of the Scheherazade or on whether members of the FSO were crew members.
An Italy police source told Reuters on Tuesday that investigators did not believe the yacht was owned by anyone in Putin's entourage. However, the source added that the government was still trying to ascertain who the owner was.
Italian Prime Minister Mario Draghi told parliament on Tuesday that his government had seized more than 800 million euros of assets owned in Italy by Russian businessmen as part of EU sanctions targeting Putin, his friends and associates.
However, officials have said very little is known about what Putin might own, or where he holds his assets.
In order to apply more pressure on Moscow, Zelenskiy told Italian lawmakers that the European Union needed to impose a full trade embargo on Russia, including a ban on oil purchases.
"Support a ban on entering your ports for Russian ships, so that they feel the cost of their aggression," he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.