
      At UN, Russia trades barbs with US, UK about chemical weapons in Ukraine
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A general view of a United Nations Security Council meeting, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine, at the United Nations Headquarters in New York City, New York, on Mar 18, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Brendan McDermid)
UNITED NATIONS: Russia traded accusations with the United States and Britain at the United Nations on Tuesday (Mar 22) over the possibility of a chemical weapons attack in Ukraine, but none produced any evidence to back their concerns.
The comments were made by diplomats to reporters after Russia raised the issue of an ammonia leak in Ukraine's besieged northeastern city of Sumy - blaming "Ukrainian radical nationalist groups" - during a closed-door UN Security Council meeting. The accusation was rejected by Britain and the United States.
Russia's deputy UN Ambassador Dmitry Polyanskiy said Russian troops "have never planned or carried out strikes against any Ukrainian facilities where toxic substances are stored or produced".
"It is clear that the Ukrainian nationalist authorities, encouraged by the Western countries will stop at nothing to intimidate its own people and stage false flag attacks to accuse Russia," Polyanskiy said.
It was the third time Russia raised the issue of biological or chemical weapons since it began what it calls a "special military operation" on Feb 24 to "demilitarise" Ukraine. The West and Ukraine reject that as a false pretext to invade a democratic country.
"It's hard not to conclude - given their record in the UK, in Russia against Alexei Navalny, given what we've seen in Syria - that this might well be a prelude to the Russians themselves creating some sort of false flag chemical weapons attack," Britain's UN Ambassador Barbara Woodward told reporters.
US Ambassador to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield dismissed Russia's accusations as "ludicrous".
"Our concern is that this is a precursor for Russia's plans to use chemical weapons," she said.
A senior US defence official said on Tuesday that the United States has not yet seen any concrete indications of an imminent Russian chemical or biological weapons attack in Ukraine but is closely monitoring intelligence.
President Joe Biden said on Monday, without providing evidence, that Russia's false accusations that Kyiv has biological and chemical weapons illustrate that Russian President Vladimir Putin is considering using them himself in Ukraine.
Polyanskiy likened the situation in Ukraine to Syria, where he said chemical attacks by "terrorist groups" were blamed on the Russian-backed Syrian government.
A joint United Nations and Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) inquiry found the Syrian government used the nerve agent sarin and had several times used chlorine as a weapon. It also blamed Islamic State for mustard gas use.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.