
      US sets red lines for China helping Russia dodge sanctions
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

US National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan speaks to the media about the war in Ukraine and other topics at the White House in Washington, on Mar 22, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Leah Millis)
WASHINGTON: The Biden administration, seeking to deter China from aiding sanctions-hit Russia, on Wednesday (Mar 23) warned Beijing not to take advantage of business opportunities created by sanctions, help Moscow evade export controls or process its banned financial transactions.
White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan told reporters that G7 countries would soon announce a unified response to make sure Russia cannot evade Western sanctions imposed over its invasion of Ukraine with the help of China or any other country.
Speaking aboard Air Force One en route to Brussels where President Joe Biden will attend an emergency NATO summit, Sullivan said, "That's not specifically about China, but it will apply to every significant economy and the decisions that any of those economies take to try, in an intentional and active way, to undermine or weaken the sanctions that we put in place."
He said the US government has conveyed this message to China and that, "We expect similar communication by European Union and individual European countries."
After Biden had a video call with Chinese President Xi Jinping last week, Beijing condemned the sanctions on Russia. It said "sweeping and indiscriminate sanctions would only make the people suffer" and should not be "further escalated".
US export restrictions are intended to block Russian access to critical goods such as commercial electronics, computers and aircraft parts.
Washington is concerned that China could help Russia "backfill" and access these products by violating trade restrictions. The US government has tools to ensure that can't happen, Sullivan added.
Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo told Reuters on Wednesday that the United States would punish any companies that violate the export controls on goods like semiconductors.
In terms of payments, Sullivan said, the United States and its G7 allies will respond to "systematic efforts, industrial-scale efforts to try to reorient the settlement of financial payments."
China has not condemned Russia's action in Ukraine, though it has expressed deep concern about the war.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.