
      Ukraine leader Zelenskyy asks Western nations if they're afraid of Russia, demands more arms
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Tanks of the Ukrainian army. (Photo: Press service of General Staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine/AFP)
LVIV/KYIV, Ukraine: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, visibly irritated, demanded that Western nations provide a fraction of the military hardware in their stockpiles to his country and asked whether they were afraid of Moscow.
Several countries have promised to send anti-armour and anti-aircraft missiles as well as small arms but Zelenskyy said Kyiv was not getting what it needed.
"It is tanks for our state. It is missile defence. It is anti-ship weapons. That is what our partners have, that is what is just gathering dust there," he said in his now customary late-night video address on Saturday. "This is all not only for the freedom of Ukraine but for the freedom of Europe."
Ukraine needs just 1 per cent of NATO's aircraft and 1 per cent of its tanks, he said, adding that it would be impossible to stop Russian attacks on the besieged southern port of Mariupol without enough tanks, armoured vehicles and aircraft.
"We've already been waiting 31 days. Who is in charge of the Euro-Atlantic community? Is it really still Moscow, because of intimidation?" he said.
Zelenskyy has repeatedly argued that Russia will seek to expand further into Europe if Ukraine falls. However NATO has rebuffed his calls for a no-fly zone to be established over Ukraine on the grounds that this could provoke a wider war.
DISAPPOINTMENT
Earlier in the day Zelenskyy spoke with Polish President Andrzej Duda and expressed disappointment that Russian-made fighter aircraft in Eastern Europe had not yet been transferred to Ukraine, Zelenskyy's office said in a statement.
Zelenskyy said Poland and the United States had both stated their readiness to make a decision on the planes. But Washington rejected a surprise offer by Poland to transfer MiG-29 fighter jets to a US base in Germany to be used to replenish Ukraine's air force.
Ukrainian Air Force spokesman Colonel Yuri Ignat told Reuters the country's pilots had trained for years and conducted joint exercises with US pilots precisely because "we understood that there could be such a scenario".
Ukraine now needs fighter jets such as American F-15s and F-16s to supplement Ukraine's ageing Soviet-era MiG-29s and Sukhoi planes, he said, in order to overcome Russia's numerical and technological superiority in the air.
"We are fighting with the equipment of the '70s and '80s, they are fighting with the equipment of 2010 and later," Ignat said.
"We would be grateful for the Soviet-made equipment offered to us by the countries of Central Europe which still have it. But it will not be enough," he said.
"We would also like to have Western planes, such as F-15, F-16. We don't ask for anything more, like the F-35," Ignat added, referring to a more modern model of US combat aircraft.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.