
      Biden says he is not calling for regime change in Russia
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

FILE PHOTO: U.S. President Joe Biden speaks during an event at the Royal Castle, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in Warsaw, Poland, March 26, 2022. REUTERS/Aleksandra Szmigiel/File Photo
WASHINGTON: US President Joe Biden clarified on Sunday (Mar 27) that the United States does not have a policy of regime change in Russia, after his declaration that Russian President Vladimir Putin "cannot remain in power."
Biden's comments in Poland on Saturday also included calling Putin a "butcher" and appeared to be a sharp escalation of the US approach to Moscow over its invasion of Ukraine.
Top American diplomats on Sunday had played down his declaration, and Biden, asked by a reporter as he departed a church service in Washington if he was calling for regime change in Russia, gave a one-word reply: "No".
Julianne Smith, the US ambassador to NATO, earlier sought to contextualise Biden's remarks, saying they followed a day of speaking with Ukrainian refugees in Warsaw. Russia's month-old invasion has driven a quarter of Ukraine's population of 44 million from their homes.
"In the moment, I think that was a principled human reaction to the stories that he had heard that day," Smith told CNN's State of the Union programme before adding: "The US does not have a policy of regime change in Russia. Full stop."
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken told a news conference in Jerusalem that Biden was making the point that Putin couldn't be empowered to wage war. But Blinken said any decision on Russia's future leadership would be "up to the Russian people".
Republicans flatly said Biden's remarks amounted to an unfortunate blunder.
Senator James Risch, the top Republican on the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, called Biden's remarks a "horrendous gaffe" and said he wished the president would have stayed on script.
"Most people who don't deal in the lane of foreign relations don't realise those nine words that he uttered would cause the kind of eruption that they did," he told CNN.
"It's going to cause a huge problem," he said, referring to Biden's statement in Warsaw: "For God's sake, this man cannot remain in power."
Senator Rob Portman, who is also on the committee, lamented the public misstep in wartime.
"It plays into the hands of the Russian propagandists and plays into the hands of Vladimir Putin. So it was a mistake," Portman told NBC's Meet the Press programme.
UKRAINIAN RESISTANCE
The United States has sought to strike a balance during the conflict in Ukraine to avoid a direct military confrontation with Russia, speeding weapons deliveries to Kyiv to help its military fight but ruling out sending troops into the country or imposing a no-fly zone.
That support has bolstered fiercer-than-expected Ukrainian resistance, and Russia has failed to seize any major Ukrainian city after more than four weeks of fighting.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy urged the West to give Ukraine tanks, planes and missiles to help fend off Russian forces.
The conflict has killed thousands of people, sent nearly 3.8 million abroad and driven more than half of Ukraine's children from their homes, according to the United Nations.
Moscow says the goals for what Putin calls a "special military operation" include demilitarising and "denazifying" its neighbor. Ukraine and its Western allies call this a pretext for an unprovoked invasion.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.