
      Almost 5,000 killed in Mariupol since Russian siege began: Mayor's office
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Destroyed cars are seen in front of an apartment building which was damaged during Ukraine-Russia conflict in the besieged southern port city of Mariupol, Ukraine, on Mar 27, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Alexander Ermochenko)
LVIV, Ukraine: Nearly 5,000 people, including about 210 children, have been killed in the southern Ukrainian city of Mariupol since Russian forces laid siege to it, a spokesperson for the mayor said on Monday (Mar 28).
It was not immediately clear how Mayor Vadym Boichenko had calculated the toll from a month of Russian bombardment that has devastated the city and trapped tens of thousands of residents without power and with few supplies.
Boichenko's office said 90 per cent of Mariupol's buildings had been damaged and 40 per cent destroyed, including hospitals, schools, kindergartens and factories.
About 140,000 people had fled the city on the Sea of Azov before the Russian siege began and 150,000 have exited since then, leaving 170,000 still there, according to its figures, which Reuters could not immediately verify.
Boichenko, who is no longer in Mariupol, said on national television earlier on Monday that about 160,000 civilians were still trapped in the city.
"People are beyond the line of humanitarian catastrophe," he said. "We need to completely evacuate Mariupol."
Ukraine said it was impossible to create any safe corridors on Monday, citing intelligence reports about possible Russian "provocations" along the routes.
Russia, which invaded Ukraine on Feb 24, denies targeting civilians and blames Ukraine for repeated failures to agree on safe corridors for trapped residents.
"The Russian Federation is playing with us. We are in the hands of the invaders," Boichenko said.
The two sides are set to resume peace talks on Tuesday in Turkey.
STRATEGIC PRIZE
Mariupol is widely seen as a strategic prize as its capture could enable Russia to create a land bridge between Crimea, annexed by Moscow in 2014, and two separatist enclaves in eastern Ukraine.
People who have fled Mariupol have been describing how tough it was living for weeks under almost constant bombardment.
"There is no food for the children, especially the infants. They delivered babies in basements because women had nowhere to go to give birth, all the maternity hospitals were destroyed," a grocery worker from Mariupol who gave her name only as Nataliia told Reuters after reaching nearby Zaporizhzhia.
"I also found out today that my son's classmate's parents were torn apart right in the yard before his eyes."
She said trapped residents had spent time looking for snow which they could melt to have water to wash their hands.
Valeriia, a 20-year-old student from Mariupol, said electricity, internet access, water and heating had been cut off on Mar 2. Soon afterwards, heavy fighting broke out nearby and part of his home was destroyed.
"Constant shooting, shelling. We were sitting in the corridor, we did not sleep or eat properly for several days. Because as soon as you get out of there, the shootings start, and you run back," she said.
She and her sister were given a ride out of the city by other residents who fled in a private car. They left their parents behind.
Sergiy, a metallurgy plant worker, recalled Grad rockets slamming into buildings and people being killed.
"There was a man walking by, this Grad, as cynical as it sounds, tore him to pieces, a corpse. I saw corpses lying around the city, you could see that a mine had exploded and shrapnel was hitting people," he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.