
      Biden says 'moral outrage' behind Putin comment, not US policy change
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

United States President Joe Biden announces his budget proposal for fiscal year 2023, as Office of Management and Budget (OMB) director Shalanda Young listens, in the State Dining Room at the White House in Washington on Mar 28, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Kevin Lamarque)
WASHINGTON: United States President Joe Biden on Monday (Mar 28) said that his remark that Russian President Vladimir Putin should not remain in power reflected his own moral outrage at Russia's invasion of Ukraine, not a US policy shift.
Biden faced pressure to speak about the comment after it generated a flood of questions as to whether the United States had changed to a policy seeking regime change in Moscow.
"I wasn't then nor am I now articulating a policy change. I was expressing moral outrage that I felt, and I make no apologies," he told reporters at the White House.
He said that his outburst, made at the end of a major address about Ukraine in Warsaw on Saturday, had been prompted by an emotional visit he had with families displaced by Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
At the end of his speech in the Polish capital, Biden added an unscripted line, saying that Putin "cannot remain in power". Administration officials rushed to clarify afterwards that the White House was not advocating for regime change in Russia.
Biden on Monday said that he was "not walking anything back" by clarifying the remark. Asked whether the remark would spur a negative response from Putin, Biden said: "I don’t care what he thinks ... He’s going to do what he’s going to do."
But Biden once again suggested that Putin should not be leading Russia. If Putin "continues on the course that he’s on, he’s going to become a pariah worldwide and who knows what he becomes at home in terms of support", Biden said.
However, Biden did not rule out meeting with Putin, saying "it depends" on what he wants to talk about.
Biden earlier this month described Putin as a "war criminal" for his role in a conflict in which many Ukrainian civilians have been killed.
He said that his remark on Saturday about Putin was intended for a Russian audience.
"The last part of the speech was talking to Russian people," Biden said. "I was communicating this to not only the Russian people, but the whole world. This is just stating a simple fact that this kind of behaviour is totally unacceptable. Totally unacceptable."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.