
      Russia using disinformation to back Ukraine invasion, Canadian agency says
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

FILE PHOTO: Armoured vehicles of pro-Russian troops drive along a street during Ukraine-Russia conflict in the besieged southern port city of Mariupol, Ukraine March 31, 2022. REUTERS/Alexander Ermochenko/File Photo
Canadian intelligence has observed numerous Russian-backed disinformation campaigns online in support of Moscow's assault on Ukraine, the Canadian signals intelligence agency said on Friday (Apr 1).
"Russia has created and amplified fake stories and narratives falsely claiming that only military targets were being attacked," the agency wrote on Twitter.
It said Russia had claimed that civilian casualties in Ukraine were lower than what confirmed, verifiable reports had shown.
The agency, the Communications Security Establishment (CSE), provided no more details or evidence of its observations.
It did not immediately respond to a Reuters request for further information.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a "special operation" designed not to occupy territory but rather to destroy its southern neighbor's military capabilities and capture what it describes as dangerous nationalists.
The agency listed what it described as false claims of Ukraine "harvesting organs of fallen soldiers, women and children," and said Russia had promoted stories that "falsely categorise Russian protesters and citizens opposed to the invasion as supporting neo-Nazis and genocide."
The CSE, Canada's national cryptologic agency, provides the government with information technology security and foreign signals intelligence.
"All observations in this thread are based on CSE intelligence. We are sharing this information as part of the government of Canada's efforts to help inform Canadians so they can protect themselves from disinformation," it tweeted.
US government images seen by Reuters earlier showed what a US official said was damage to grain storage facilities in eastern Ukraine indicative of the severity of Russian attacks with an impact on global food supply.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.