
      Russia denies killing civilians in Ukraine's Bucha
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Bucha's mayor said hundreds of people had been buried in a mass grave. (Photo: AFP/Ronaldo Schemidt)
Russia on Sunday (Apr 3) denied Ukrainian allegations that it had killed civilians in the town of Bucha, recently retaken by Ukrainian forces from Moscow's troops. 
Russia's defence ministry said in a statement that footage and photographs showing dead bodies were "yet another provocation". 
"During the time this settlement was under the control of Russian armed forces, not a single local resident suffered from any violent actions," the ministry said.
Photo and video of corpses strewn across the streets of Bucha were "another production of the Kyiv regime for the Western media," it added.
Bucha mayor Anatoliy Fedoruk had earlier said that 300 residents had been killed by the Russian army. 
At least 57 people were found buried in a mass grave, a local official said Sunday as he showed AFP the slit trench where the bodies lay. Some of the bodies were either unburied or partially buried in the earth.
Some of the bodies were concealed in black zip-up body bags while others were in civilian clothing.
"It looks exactly like war crimes," President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's spokesman told BBC television.
"We found mass graves. We found people with their hands and with their legs tied up ... and with shots, bullet holes, in the back of their head.
"They were clearly civilians and they were executed."
In its statement on Sunday, Russia said that its military units had withdrawn from Bucha on Mar 30.
"On Mar 31, the mayor of Bucha, Anatoliy Fedoruk, confirmed in his video message that there was no Russian military in the city, but he did not even mention any local residents shot in the streets with their hands tied," said the Russian defence ministry.
"The so-called 'evidence of crimes' in Bucha appeared only on the fourth day, when SBU [Security Service of Ukraine] officers and representatives of Ukrainian television arrived in the city," it added.
"The photos and video frames from Bucha are another staged performance by the Kyiv regime for the Western media, as it was in Mariupol with the maternity hospital, as well as in other cities."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.