
      Peruvians protest surging gas and fertiliser prices amid Ukraine invasion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A burning tire serves as part of a blockade of a highway to Lima during a national transportation strike against gas prices and toll road rates, in Ica, Peru, Apr 4, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Sebastian Castaneda)
ICA, Peru: Peruvians on Monday (Apr 4) continued a wave of protests against a rapid surge in fuel and fertiliser prices triggered by Russia's invasion of Ukraine, as the Andean nation's government moved to try to lower prices.
Protesters near the southern city of Ica burned toll booths and clashed with police as protests spread from the Peruvian highlands to the coast.
"This strike isn't happening just here, it's all over Peru today," said one protester, who declined to be identified by name.
Protests erupted last week as farmers and truckers blocked some of the country's main highways to the capital Lima, leading to a sudden surge in food prices in the city. At least four people have died, the government has said, amid violent clashes between protesters and police.
The government responded over the weekend with a proposal to forego most taxes on fuel in an attempt to quickly lower prices, while also raising the minimum wage by about 10 per cent to 1,205 soles (US$332) a month.
The protests are also a reality check for the embattled presidency of leftist Pedro Castillo, a peasant farmer and school teacher who won the election last year with overwhelming support from Peru's rural poor.
His support, however, has waned over time and currently hovers at around 25 per cent in the country as a whole, according to polls.
Peru has also issued an emergency declaration for its agricultural sector due to rising fertiliser prices triggered by Western sanctions on Russia, a major exporter of potash, ammonia, urea and other soil nutrients.
Like many countries, Peru was already battling high inflation before the war. In March, inflation hit a 26-year high, largely driven by rising fuel and food prices.
Oscar Graham, Peru's finance minister, told Reuters on Friday that the biggest threat to Peru's economy is the prolongation of the Russia-Ukraine conflict.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.