
      Donors agree €659.5 million in aid to Moldova amid influx of Ukrainian refugees, rising energy prices
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock opens the conference to assist Moldova with the influx of Ukrainian refugees in Berlin on Apr 5, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Hannibal Hanschke)
BERLIN: European and international donors agreed on Tuesday (Apr 5) to extend €659.5 million (US$720 million) in aid to Moldova, Europe's poorest country, which is hosting more than 100,000 refugees from Ukraine at a time of soaring energy prices.
Speaking after a donor conference she hosted in Berlin, German Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock said that Germany would work to help Moldova free itself from its dependency on Russia for energy supplies.
With fewer than 3 million people, Moldova has taken in more refugees fleeing Russia's invasion of Ukraine per head than any other country.
"We agreed today to support Moldova with loans, budget support and other financial assistance worth €659.5 million," Baerbock said at the end of the conference she hosted jointly with her French and Romanian counterparts.
Like Ukraine, Moldova is a former part of the Soviet Union, some of whose territory is occupied by Moscow-backed separatists.
Although it has strong historical and linguistic ties to neighbouring European Union member Romania, it relies exclusively on Russia's Gazprom for gas imports.
Moldovan Prime Minister Natalia Gavrilita asked donors at the conference, who included the EU and the French and Romanian foreign ministers, for support in diversifying her country's energy supplies even as it deals with refugees in need.
"Since the beginning of the war, 400,000 refugees have crossed Moldova's borders and 100,000 have decided to stay," she said. "Almost half of them are children, these are vulnerable populations."
Moldova's electricity network needed to be interconnected with the European Union's over the Romanian border in order to boost its energy independence, she said.
She also asked the EU to lift barriers to selling its agricultural produce westwards, noting that Russia, Belarus and Ukraine had accounted for 15 per cent of Moldova's foreign trade before the war.
"Moldova is the most vulnerable among Ukraine's neighbours," she said. "Today Moldova needs good friends and reliable partners."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.