
      UK's Johnson calls on Russians to share truth about Ukraine 'atrocities'
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

FILE PHOTO: British Prime Minister Boris Johnson walks in Downing Street in London, Britain, April 5, 2022. REUTERS/Tom Nicholson/File Photo
LONDON: British Prime Minister Boris Johnson made a video appeal to Russians on Tuesday (APr 5), calling on them to share reports about "atrocities" committed by their troops in Ukraine, saying if people knew the truth they would not support the war.
The United States and European countries, including Britain, have accused Russia of war crimes after the release of graphic images of civilian deaths and mass graves in the Ukrainian town of Bucha, outside Kyiv, over the weekend.
Russia, which says it has launched a "special military operation" to "denazify" Ukraine, has rejected the allegations, saying they were part of a forgery to denigrate the Russian military.
"The Russian people deserve the truth, you deserve the facts," said Johnson, speaking partly in Russian, in his message published on Twitter.
"The atrocities committed by Russian troops in Bucha, Irpin and elsewhere in Ukraine have horrified the world ... The reports are so shocking, so sickening, it's no wonder your government is seeking to hide them from you.
"Your president knows that if you could see what was happening, you would not support his war."  
US President Joe Biden has described Russian President Vladimir Putin as a war criminal in the wake of the grisly discoveries in Bucha, and the United States has said it will seek to build a war crimes case against the Russian leader.
Russia has said Biden's comments were unacceptable.
Johnson called for Russians to use Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections so they could access independent information about the war to find out for themselves.
"And when you find the truth, share it. Those responsible will be held to account. And history will remember who looked the other way," he said, adding in Russian: "Your president stands accused of committing war crimes. But I cannot believe he's acting in your name."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.