
      Invoking Guernica bombing, Ukraine's Zelenskyy urges Spain to force Russia out
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

MADRID: Likening the Russian bombing of his country to the bloody air raid on the Spanish town of Guernica by Nazi Germany, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy told Spain's parliament on Tuesday (Apr 5) the West must do more to force Moscow to abandon its invasion.
Shortly after addressing the United Nations Security Council, Zelenskyy told Spanish lawmakers to contemplate the current situation where hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians are living in fear without water, food or medicine, and he called on Spanish companies still operating in Russia to leave.
Earlier on Tuesday, Spain followed several other European countries and pledged to expel 27 Russian diplomats.
"Imagine that people now - in Europe - live for weeks in basements to save lives. From shelling, from air bombs. It's April 2022, and the reality in Ukraine is the same as in April 1937. When the whole world learned the name of one of your cities - Guernica," Zelenskyy said.
Adolf Hitler sent aircraft in support of Francisco Franco's nationalist forces to strike the Basque town on Apr 26, 1937, killing as many as 1,600 and wounding hundreds. The tragedy drove Pablo Picasso to paint a masterpiece of the same name.
Calling for further international sanctions against Moscow, Zelenskyy praised Spanish companies that have stopped operations in Russia while singling out some businesses still working there.
"I know that many of your companies have already stopped financing the Russian military machine through taxes. I am also grateful to your state and society for its principled position on sanctions," he told a packed lower house in Madrid.
But he appealed directly to blasting equipment provider Maxam, ceramics group Porcelanosa, and capital-goods manufacturers association Sercobe to stop doing business with Russia.
Porcelanosa said it has not initiated any new sales in Russia since the invasion, but had fulfilled contracts with distributors signed before the war.
"In March the Russian market represented only 0.009 per cent of the company's sales ... equivalent to €197,000," the company said in a statement.
Neither Maxam nor Sercobe responded to requests for comment.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.