
      US will supply Ukraine with 'the weapons it needs' against Russia
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A Ukrainian service member holds a Javelin missile system at a position on the front line in the north Kyiv region, Ukraine, on Mar 13, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Gleb Garanich)
WASHINGTON: The United States is committed to providing Ukraine with “the weapons it needs” to defend itself against Russia, US national security adviser Jake Sullivan said on Sunday (Apr 10) as Ukraine seeks more military aid from the West.
Sullivan said the Biden administration will send more weapons to Ukraine to prevent Russia from seizing more territory and targeting civilians, attacks that Washington has labeled war crimes.
“We’re going to get Ukraine the weapons it needs to beat back the Russians to stop them from taking more cities and towns where they commit these crimes,” Sullivan said on ABC News’ This Week.
Moscow has rejected accusations of war crimes by Ukraine and Western countries.
Speaking later on NBC News’ Meet the Press, Sullivan said the United States was “working around the clock to deliver our own weapons . . . and organising and coordinating the delivery of weapons from many other countries.”
“Weapons are arriving every day,” Sullivan said, “including today.”
The United States has sent US$1.7 billion in military assistance to Ukraine since Russia launched its invasion on Feb 24, the White House said last week.
Weapons shipments have included defensive anti-aircraft Stinger and anti-tank Javelin missiles, as well as ammunition and body armor.
But US and European leaders are being pressed by Ukraine President Volodymyr Zelenskiy to provide heavier arms and equipment to engage Russia in the eastern region of the country, where Russia is expected to intensify its military efforts.
In excerpts of an interview with CBS News' 60 Minutes that will air later on Sunday, Zelenskiy expressed skepticism that the United States would deliver the weapons he said are needed.
Whether Ukraine can beat back the Russian incursion "depends on how fast we will be helped by the United States. To be honest, whether we will be able to survive depends on this," Zelenskiy said.
"I have 100 per cent confidence in our people and in our armed forces, but unfortunately I don't have the confidence that we will be receiving everything we need."
On Friday, Ukrainian officials said more than 50 people were killed in a missile strike on a train station in city of Kramatorsk in the Donetsk region, where thousands of people had gathered to evacuate.
Russia's invasion has forced around a quarter of the population of 44 million to leave their homes, turned cities into rubble and killed or injured thousands.
Moscow has repeatedly denied targeting civilians in what it calls a "special operation" to demilitarise and "denazify" its southern neighbour. Ukraine and Western nations have dismissed this as a baseless pretext for war.
Russia on Saturday appointed a new general to lead its forces in Ukraine, Aleksandr Dvornikov, who had significant military experience in Syria.
With that background, Sullivan said he expects Dvornikov to authorise more brutality against the Ukrainian civilian population.
Republican US Representative Liz Cheney, speaking on CNN’s State of the Nation, urged the Biden administration to provide Ukraine with both offensive weapons such as tanks and planes and defensive systems like anti-tank and anti-aircraft missiles.
"I think we need to do everything that Zelenskiy says he needs at this point, given the just unbelievable battle that they have put up," she said.
A CBS News poll released on Sunday showed widespread support among Americans for sending more weapons to Ukraine.
According to the poll, which was conducted last week as news of Russian attacks on civilians unfolded, 72 per cent of those surveyed favor sending more weapons, while 78 per cent support economic sanctions on Russia.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.