
      Ukraine says fighting rages in Mariupol, blasts rattle Kyiv
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

In this Apr 14, 2022, file photo, the Illich Iron and Steel Works factory in the southern port city of Mariupol is seen behind a street which was damaged during the Ukraine-Russia conflict. (File photo: Reuters/Alexander Ermochenko)
KYIV: Ukraine said on Friday (Apr 15) that it was trying to break Russian forces' siege of Mariupol, with fighting raging around the city's Illich steelworks and port, as the capital Kyiv was rocked by some of the most powerful explosions in two weeks.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiyy said the military situation in the south and east of the country was "still very difficult," while praising the work of his armed forces.
"The successes of our military on the battlefield are really significant, historically significant. But they are still not enough to clean our land of the occupiers. We will beat them some more," Zelenskiyy said in a late-night video address, calling again for allies to send heavier weapons and for an international embargo on Russian oil.
Russia said that it had struck overnight what it said was a factory in Kyiv that made and repaired anti-ship missiles, in apparent retaliation for the sinking of the Moskva, the flagship of Moscow's Black Sea Fleet, on Thursday.
Ukraine said that one of its missiles had caused the Moskva to sink, in a powerful symbol of its resistance to a better-armed foe. Moscow said that the ship sank while being towed in stormy seas after a fire caused by an explosion of ammunition.
The United States believes the Moskva was hit by two Ukrainian missiles and that there were Russian casualties, although numbers were unclear, a senior US official said on Friday.
Russia had previously said that more than 500 sailors on board the Moskva were evacuated after the blast. Neither that assertion nor the US assessment could be independently verified.
MARIUPOL REDUCED TO RUBBLE
Mariupol, on the Sea of Azov, has seen the worst fighting of the war. Home to 400,000 people before Russia's invasion, the city has been reduced to rubble in seven weeks of siege and bombardment. Thousands of civilians have died and tens of thousands are still trapped in the city.
"The situation in Mariupol is difficult and hard. Fighting is happening right now. The Russian army is constantly calling on additional units to storm the city," defence ministry spokesperson Oleksandr Motuzyanyk told a televised briefing, although he said the Russians have not completely captured it.
Motuzyanyk said that Russia had used long-range bombers to attack Mariupol for the first time since its Feb 24 invasion, and that, elsewhere, Russian forces were concentrating efforts on seizing the cities of Rubizhne and Popasna in Ukraine's east.
In his address, Zelenskiyy said Ukraine's allies have the power to make the war much shorter, by sending the weapons his government needs. "I always tell all our partners ... that the amount of support for Ukraine directly affects the restoration of peace. It literally defines how many more Ukrainians the occupiers will manage to kill," he said.
Moscow has said that its main war aim is to capture the Donbas, an eastern region of two provinces that are already partly held by Russian-backed separatists, after its invasion force was driven from the outskirts of Kyiv earlier this month.
Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister Iryna Vereshchuk said that 2,864 people had been evacuated from conflict areas on Friday, including 363 people from Mariupol who used their own transport.
Zelenskiyy recently made a direct appeal to US President Joe Biden for the United States to designate Russia a "state sponsor of terrorism", the Washington Post reported on Friday, citing people familiar with their conversation.
The list currently includes four countries: North Korea, Cuba, Iran and Syria.
A White House spokesperson declined to respond specifically to the report, adding: "We will continue to consider all options to increase the pressure on Putin."
RUSSIA THREATENS STRIKES ON KYIV
If Moscow captures Mariupol, it would be the only big city to fall to the Russians so far.
Russia's defence ministry said it had captured the city's Illich steel works. The report could not be confirmed.
Ukrainian defenders are mainly believed to be holding out in Azovstal, another huge steel works.
Both plants are owned by Metinvest - the empire of Ukraine's richest businessman and backbone of Ukraine's industrial east - which told Reuters on Friday that it would never let its enterprises operate under Russian occupation.
"We believe in the victory of Ukraine and plan to resume production after the end of hostilities," Metinvest told Reuters in a statement, adding that its sites were damaged but that it was impossible to say by how much while fighting continued.
The Moskva was by far Russia's largest vessel in the Black Sea fleet, equipped with guided missiles to shoot down planes and attack the shore. It had radar to provide air defence cover for the fleet.
Moscow has used its naval power to blockade Ukrainian ports and threaten a potential amphibious landing along the coast. Without its flagship, the largest warship sunk during conflict since Argentina's General Belgrano in the 1982 Falklands war, its ability to menace Ukraine from the sea could be crippled.
Russia's Defence Ministry said its forces would step up strikes on Kyiv.
"The number and scale of missile strikes on targets in Kyiv will increase in response to any terrorist attacks or acts of sabotage on Russian territory committed by the Kyiv nationalist regime," the ministry said.
Kirill Kyrylo, 38, a worker at a car repair shop in the Ukrainian capital, said he had seen three impacts on an industrial building, causing a blaze that was put out by firefighters.
"The building was on fire and I had to hide behind my car," he said, pointing out the shattered glass of the repair shop and bits of metal that had flown from the burning building.
Russia initially described its aims in Ukraine as disarming its neighbour and defeating nationalists there.
Kyiv and its Western allies say those are bogus justifications for an unprovoked war of aggression that has driven a quarter of Ukraine's 44 million people from their homes and led to the deaths of thousands.
KYIV TO SEE MORE ATTACKS
Russia's Defence Ministry said that its forces would step up strikes on Kyiv.
"The number and scale of missile strikes on targets in Kyiv will increase in response to any terrorist attacks or acts of sabotage on Russian territory committed by the Kyiv nationalist regime," the Russian Defence Ministry said.
Kirill Kyrylo, 38, a worker at a car repair shop in the Ukrainian capital, said that he had seen three blasts hit an industrial building, causing a blaze that was put out by firefighters.
"The building was on fire and I had to hide behind my car," he said, pointing out the shattered glass of the repair shop and bits of metal that had flown over from the burning building.
Moscow reported that Russian villages in the Belgorod region near the border had been hit by Ukrainian shelling. Attacks in the area, a major staging ground for Russia's invasion, could not be confirmed.
Russia initially described its aims in Ukraine as disarming its neighbour and defeating nationalists there.
Kyiv and its Western allies say those are bogus justifications for an unprovoked war of aggression that has driven a quarter of Ukraine's 44 million people from their homes and led to the deaths of thousands.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.