
      Russian crowd mourns Black Sea flagship Moskva after sinking
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A sailor looks at the Russian missile cruiser Moskva moored in the Black Sea port of Sevastopol in Crimea in 2013. (File photo: Reuters/Stringer)
Dozens of people gathered in the Crimean city of Sevastopol on Friday (Apr 15) to mourn the sinking of the flagship of Russia's Black Sea Fleet, a symbol, the crowd heard, of hope, revival and power until its demise.
Some embraced and others laid flowers in memory of the Moskva missile cruiser at a monument to the 1696 foundation of the Russian navy in the centre of Sevastopol, headquarters of the Black Sea Fleet.
Moscow, which annexed Crimea from Ukraine in 2014, said that the ship sank while being towed in stormy seas after a fire caused by an ammunition explosion.
Ukraine said that one of its missiles had caused it to sink.
Reuters was unable to verify the exact circumstances of the ship's demise.
"Even for those who have not been on it, the Moskva was a symbol for everyone, a symbol of our power, of our hope, of the revival of the fleet in the 1990s" following the collapse of the Soviet Union, said Reserve Captain Sergei Gorbachev, who spoke to the crowd in his naval uniform.
"There will be victories, there will be tragedies, but the memory remains," Gorbachev said.
The crowd, which included a number of people who served on the ship, stood in respectful silence. Some wore the ribbon of St George, a symbol of the Russian military.
"The loss of every ship, especially a flagship, is a tragedy for all those tens of thousands of people who served there for over 20 years," said priest Georgiy Ployakov.
Russia sent tens of thousands of soldiers into Ukraine on Feb 24 on what it calls a "special operation".
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.