
      Ukraine war overshadows pope's Good Friday services
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Pope Francis leads the Good Friday Passion of the Lord service in St Peter's Basilica at the Vatican on Apr 15, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Remo Casilli)
VATICAN CITY: Pope Francis presided at a solemn Good Friday service recalling the last hours in the life of Jesus, with the shadow of the war in Ukraine hanging over the most sombre day in the Christian calendar.
Francis, 85, who has been suffering from a recent flare-up of pain in his knee and legs, walked with a limp along the main aisle of St Peter's Basilica at the start and end of the service on Friday (Apr 15), known as the Passion of the Lord.
However, he did not prostrate himself on the marble floor as he has at the start of similar past services. He instead stood for a few minutes with his head bowed.
Francis later sat while cantors and a choir sang gospel verses recounting events from Jesus' arrest to his burial.
The Good Friday service is one of the few events where the pope does not deliver a homily, leaving it to the preacher of the papal household, Cardinal Raniero Cantalamessa.
"This year we celebrate Easter not to the joyful sound of bells, but with the noise in our ears of bombs and explosions not far from here," Catalamessa said, referring to the war in Ukraine.
Paraphrasing the biblical peace call to "beat your swords into plowshares and your spears into pruning hooks", Cantalamessa spoke of beating "missiles into factories and homes".
On Friday night, Francis was due to preside at a candlelight Via Crucis (Way of the Cross) procession at Rome's Colosseum.
This year, the Vatican's decision to have both Ukrainians and Russians take part in one part of the the procession has caused friction with Ukrainian Catholic leaders, who had called for it to reconsidered.
On Saturday evening, Francis will lead an Easter Vigil mass in the basilica.
On Easter Sunday, the most important day in the Christian liturgical calendar, he will say mass in St Peter's Square and then deliver his twice-yearly Urbi et Orbi ("to the city and the world") message and blessing.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.