
      Scholz defends Germany's commitment to secure Ukraine arms amid growing criticism
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

German Chancellor Olaf Scholz makes a statement after talks with European leaders and US President Joe Biden, in Berlin, Germany, on Apr 19, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Lisi Niesner/Pool)
BERLIN: Germany will continue to support Ukraine militarily although it has practically maxed-out the weapons it can deliver from its own stocks and is instead working with its armaments industry and other nations to send more, Chancellor Olaf Scholz said on Tuesday (Apr 19).
Scholz is facing growing frustration at home as well as abroad with what critics say is his lack of leadership on Ukraine. Even members of the junior partners in his three-way coalition are now openly accusing him of dithering on Ukrainian pleas to send it more heavy weapons.
Speaking after participating in a call with Western allies including US President Joe Biden, Scholz said they were coordinating more weapons deliveries to Ukraine to ensure it could fend off Russia's invasion.
Asked however if Germany would send Leopard tanks, he said the Western allies - not just Berlin - agreed it made sense to send Ukraine arms it could immediately deploy. As such, the allies would enable East European countries to hand over Soviet weapons it was familiar with by committing to replacing them, he said.
Moreover Berlin was liaising between German military equipment makers and Ukraine to deliver the country weapons like anti-tank and air defence weapons.
"We will provide the necessary money for the purchase," said Scholz.
Scholz must balance pressure from the Greens and Free Democrats to step up arms supplies to Ukraine with some reticence among elements of his Social Democrats (SPD), which long advocated Western rapprochement with Russia prior to the war in Ukraine.
Marie-Agnes Strack-Zimmermann, the head of parliament's defence committee and a member of the FDP, criticized Scholz for not delivering more concrete details.
"We are still lagging behind" on weapons deliveries, she wrote on Twitter.
In a poll by Forsa published on Tuesday by broadcasters RTL and NTV, some 52 per cent were unsatisfied with Scholz's work compared to just 31 per cent and 34 per cent for Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock and EConomy Minister Robert Habeck, both from the Greens.
Support for the SPD dropped 2 per centage points over the past week to 25 per cent, putting them neck-to-neck with the conservatives, up one percentage point.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.