
      Czech companies to repair damaged Ukrainian tanks
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A Ukrainian tank drives next to a destroyed Russian vehicle, marked with the "Z" symbol, amid Russia's attack on Ukraine, in the village of Husarivka, in Kharkiv region on Apr 14, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Alkis Konstantinidis)
PRAGUE: Czech defence companies will repair Ukrainian tanks and other military vehicles that have been damaged in fighting or need servicing after long-term storage, the Czech Defence Ministry said on Tuesday (Apr 19).
The Czech Republic has been among the most active countries in supporting the Ukrainian military with donations and sales of weapons and ammunition, including shipments of Soviet-era tanks, multiple rocket launchers, howitzers, infantry fighting vehicles and anti-aircraft weapons.
"Small faults or fighting damage will be repaired by the Ukrainian army's and Ukrainian defence industry's own efforts," the ministry said.
"Czech assistance will utilise the capacities of Czech defence industry companies for more extensive works, including overhauls and bringing equipment in long-term storage to service."
The first contract will include repairs of an unspecified number of Soviet-era T-64 tanks, it said.
It said the T-64 tanks would be repaired at privately held arms trading and production firm CZECHOSLOVAK GROUP, which is also one of the sources of equipment sent to Ukraine.
The repairs will be done at Czech firms' facilities in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, the ministry said.
Ukraine has repeatedly called on the West to supply heavy equipment and ammunition to help it resist the Russia assault.
Russia attacked Ukraine in February in what it calls a special operation to demilitarise the country.
Western countries and Ukraine accuse Russian President Vladimir Putin of unprovoked aggression.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.