
      Biden unveils US$800 million in new Ukraine military aid, to ask Congress for more
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

U.S. President Joe Biden is flanked by U.S. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Mark Milley as he meets with military leaders in the Cabinet Room at the White House in Washington, U.S., April 20, 2022. REUTERS/Jonathan Ernst
WASHINGTON: US President Joe Biden pledged US$800 million in more weaponry for Ukraine on Thursday (Apr 21) and said he would ask Congress for more money to help bolster support for the Ukrainian military as it faces a fresh onslaught by Russia on its eastern flank.
Addressing Americans from the White House's Roosevelt Room, Biden pledged to send heavy artillery, dozens of howitzers, and 144,000 rounds of ammunition, as well as tactical drones, as he called on Congress for supplemental funding to provide additional aid for Kyiv.
Biden also announced US$500 million in direct economic assistance to the Ukrainian government as it battles to save the lives of people under siege by Russian forces.
"We’re in a critical window now of time where they’re going to set the stage for the next phase of this war,” Biden said, referring to Russia's tactical shift to the east. The United States and allies are “moving as fast as possible” to provide Ukraine with the equipment and weapons it needs.
Biden said the new assistance will expend most of the remaining funds available for this purpose and that he will make a supplemental funding request to Congress next week. He said the amount is being discussed.
"That’s being decided now. I’m asking the Defense Department to put together a proposal," he said.
The US House of Representatives will consider the additional aid for Ukraine as soon as next week, Speaker Nancy Pelosi told reporters. There is strong support among Democrats and Republicans for assisting Ukraine.
The Pentagon said that the new package would include 75 155mm long-range howitzers, 72 tactical vehicles to tow them, and more than 100 Phoenix Ghost drones.
Biden spoke after face-to-face talks with Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal, who is in Washington for a variety of meetings.
The president announced plans to ban Russian-affiliated ships from docking at US ports, as previously reported by Reuters, further ratcheting up pressure on Moscow. A senior administration official said the move was aimed at further isolating Russia.
Biden also said his administration will allow Ukrainians fleeing Russia's invasion of their home country to come to the United States temporarily if they have American sponsors, a move that could affect thousands of refugees.
The new arms package is the same size as an US$800 million one announced last week
Biden said the new weapons are needed as Ukraine battles a major offensive from Russia in the east, where the flatter terrain requires a different set of weaponry.
On Wednesday, he convened US military leaders in an annual White House gathering that took on special significance as the war enters a risky new phase.
Russia has said it has entered a new stage of its operation and is methodically seeking to "liberate" the Donbas region of eastern Ukraine. Western allies anticipate Russia's campaign could last many months, grind to a stalemate and test the battlefield capabilities of Ukrainian fighters.
Biden disputed Russian claims of control of the embattled city of Mariupol, saying that "there's no evidence that Mariupol has completely fallen". He added that Russia "should allow humanitarian corridors to let people at that steel mill and other places (that) are buried under rubble to get out".
Russia says it launched what it calls a "special military operation" on Feb 24 to demilitarise and "denazify" Ukraine. Kyiv and its Western allies reject that as a false pretext.
US forces are not fighting in Ukraine but are indirectly engaged, arming, training and financing its forces.
The US aid announced last week included artillery systems, artillery rounds, armoured personnel carriers and unmanned coastal defence boats, broadening the scope of materiel sent to Kyiv to include new types of heavy equipment.
Adding this week's package brings total US military aid to Ukraine since Russia invaded to well over US$3 billion.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.