
      World Bank estimates Ukraine physical damage at roughly US$60 billion so far
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Rescuers work at a residential building damaged during Ukraine-Russia conflict in the southern port city of Mariupol, Ukraine, on Apr 19, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Alexander Ermochenko)
WASHINGTON: Physical damage to Ukraine's buildings and infrastructure from Russia's invasion has reached roughly US$60 billion and will rise further as the war continues, World Bank President David Malpass said on Thursday (Apr 21).
Malpass told a World Bank conference on Ukraine's financial assistance needs that the early estimate of "narrow" damage costs does not include the growing economic costs of the war to Ukraine.
"Of course the war is still ongoing, so those costs are rising," Malpass said.
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, in a virtual address to the conference, outlined far bigger costs and financing needs. He told participants in interpreted remarks that Ukraine needs US$7 billion per month to make up for economic losses caused by Russia's invasion of his country.
"And we will need hundreds of billions of dollars to rebuild all this later," Zelenskyy said.
He said the global community needed to exclude Russia immediately from international financial institutions, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and others, and said all countries "must immediately be prepared to break up all relations with Russia".
The conference on the sidelines of the IMF and World Bank spring meetings included finance officials from a number of countries, including US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, who earlier said the United States would double its direct non-military aid pledge to US$1 billion.
Zelenskyy said called for countries that have imposed sanctions and freezes on Russian assets to use that money to help rebuild Ukraine after the war and to pay for losses suffered by other countries.
FROZEN ASSETS
At a news conference, Yellen said Russia should shoulder some of Ukraine's rebuilding costs.
"It’s clear that the rebuilding costs, ultimately, in Ukraine are going to be enormous," Yellen said.
Looking "to Russia one way or another to help provide some of what’s necessary for Ukraine to build is something I think we ought to be pursuing".
But she cautioned that using seized Russian central bank reserves in the United States to rebuild Ukraine would be a "significant step" that would need discussions and agreement with international partners.
"It's one that you would carefully need to think through the consequences of," Yellen said. "I wouldn't want to do so lightly."
Ukrainian Prime Minister Denys Shmyhal, who attended the conference in person, said Ukraine's GDP could decline by 30 per cent to 50 per cent, with direct and indirect losses totalling US$560 billion so far. That total is more than three times the size of Ukraine's economy, at US$155.5 billion in 2020, according to World Bank data.
"If we do not stop this war together, the losses will increase dramatically," Shmyhal said, adding that Ukraine would need a rebuilding plan similar to the post-World War II Marshall Plan that helped to rebuild a war ravaged Europe.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.