
      Russia says 1 dead, 27 missing after Moskva cruiser sinking, families seek answers
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

This file photo taken on Dec 17, 2015, shows the Russian missile cruiser Moskva on patrol in the Mediterranean Sea, off the coast of Syria. (File photo: AFP/Max Delany)
MOSCOW: Russia said on Friday (Apr 22) that one crew member had died and 27 were missing after the Moskva missile cruiser sank last week, Moscow's first admission of the losses following the tragedy.
The flagship of Russia's Black Sea Fleet had been leading Russia's naval effort in the nearly two-month conflict in Ukraine, playing a central role in the siege of the port city of Mariupol.
After the Moskva sank, parents and other family members of sailors who served aboard - including conscripts - took to social media, saying their children had gone missing and that they needed answers.
"As a result of a fire on Apr 13, the Moskva missile cruiser was seriously damaged due to the detonation of ammunition," the defence ministry said in a statement carried by Russian news agencies late on Friday.
"One serviceman was killed, another 27 crew members went missing," the ministry said, adding that "the remaining 396 members" had been evacuated.
A senior Pentagon official said that the Moskva warship was hit by two Ukrainian missiles before it sank in the Black Sea.
The Russian defence ministry made the announcement after authorities first said that all crew members had been evacuated.
"The Russian defence ministry is providing all the necessary support and assistance to the families and friends of the deceased and the missing," the statement said.
It said that "an absolute majority" of contract servicemen wished to continue their service aboard vessels of the Black Sea Fleet.
In recent days, a number of Russian parents called for the truth about their missing children, but the Kremlin had previously refused to reveal any details about the casualties aboard the warship which is able to carry up to 680 sailors.
Several families have said on social media or in statements to independent Russian or foreign press that they cannot find their children who were serving on the Moskva.
One parent, Dmitry Shkrebets, said on social media that when he tried to learn more about the fate of his missing son, the commander of the cruiser and his deputy had gone incommunicado.
The military "said the entire crew was evacuated. It's a lie! A blatant and cynical lie!” Shkrebets, a resident of Crimea, wrote on VK, a popular Russian social media platform, on Apr 17, three days after the ship went down.
Similar posts quickly followed from other parts of Russia. The Associated Press found social media posts looking for at least 13 other young men who reportedly served on the Moskva whose families could not find them.
One woman spoke to the AP on condition of anonymity, as she feared for her son's safety. She said her son was a conscript and had been aboard the Moskva for several months before telling her in early February that the ship was about to depart for drills. She lost touch with him for several weeks after that.
The news about Russia invading Ukraine worried her, she said, and she started reading the news online and on social media every day. The last time they spoke on the phone was in mid-March. He was on the ship but did not say where it was.
She didn't start looking for him until a day after she learned about trouble aboard the Moskva, because official statements from the defence ministry said the crew was evacuated. But no one called or messaged her about her son's whereabouts, and she started to get agitated.
Calls to various military officials and hotlines got her nowhere at first, but she persisted. A call she made on the way to a grocery store brought bleak news — that her son was listed as missing and that there was little chance he survived in the cold water.
“I said ‘But you said you rescued everyone,’ and he said ‘I only have the lists’. I screamed ‘What are you doing?!’" she told the AP. “I got hysterical, right at the bus stop (where I was standing), I felt like the ground was giving way under my feet. I started shaking.”
The families' accounts could not be independently verified.
Asked to comment on the situation on Tuesday, President Vladimir Putin's spokesman said that the Kremlin was not at liberty to reveal any details.
Meduza, an independent Russian-language news website, citing a source close to the command of Russia's Black Sea Fleet, said that 37 members of the Moskva's crew had died.
Around 100 men were wounded while the precise number of missing is unknown, the publication said.
About 500 people were on board when the Moskva was hit, Meduza said, citing the source.
Political analyst Abbas Gallyamov says the sinking of the Moskva is a major political blow for President Vladimir Putin, not so much because of the outcry from families, but because it hurts Putin's image of military might.
“This trait, might, is under attack now because we're now talking about the devastation of the fleet,” Gallyamov said. But the families' woes underscores "that one shouldn't trust the Russian authorities.”
In the meantime, some families with missing sons plan to continue seeking the truth.
“Now we will turn to figuring out for how long one can ‘go missing’ in the open sea,” Shkrebets posted Friday.
 
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.