
      Moldova holds security talks on blasts in Russia-backed Transnistria region
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

The interior ministry of Transnistria said that two "powerful" antennae that were re-broadcasting Russian radio were out of order, and shared images of them lying on the ground. (Photo: AFP/Transnistrian Interior Ministry handout)
CHISINAU, Moldova: The president of ex-Soviet Moldova on Tuesday (Apr 26) convened a meeting of the country's security council after a series of blasts in the Russian-backed separatist Transnistria region.
The breakaway region, which borders western Ukraine, saw explosions hit its security ministry on Monday and a radio tower on Tuesday morning.
The press service of President Maia Sandu said that she was set to hold a meeting of the country's Supreme Security Council "in connection with the incidents in the Transnistria region".
The meeting was announced to start at 1pm local time (10am GMT) followed by a press briefing at 3pm.
Two explosions hit a radio tower re-broadcasting Russian stations near the Ukrainian border early on Tuesday, the interior ministry of the breakaway region said.
"Early on Apr 26, two explosions were heard in the village of Mayak in Grigoriopolsky district," it said in a statement.
It said that the blasts at 6.40am and 7.05am local time targeted the "Mayak" radio centre, about 50km from the regional capital Tiraspol.
The ministry said that two "powerful" antennae that were re-broadcasting Russian radio were out of order, and shared images of them lying on the ground.
There were no injuries, it added.
This came after the Transnistrian authorities said that the offices of the state security ministry in Tiraspol were hit by what appeared to be a grenade-launcher attack on Monday evening.
No one was injured in the incident, which happened at around 6pm on a public holiday for Orthodox Easter.
But windows were blown out in the state security ministry building and smoke was "billowing out of the buildings", the Transnistria region's interior ministry said in a statement.
RUSSIAN SPEAKERS "OPPRESSED"
There was no immediate reason to suggest a link between the two incidents.
Transnistria is an unrecognised Moscow-backed breakaway region that seceded in 1990. A short war followed in 1992, with the Russian army fighting alongside separatists against Moldovan forces.
The frozen conflict has seen Russia deploying troops there ever since.
Transnistria is located about 80km from Moldova's capital Chisinau, bordering western Ukraine.
The conflict in Ukraine has provoked fears in Moldova that the country could become Russia's next target.
Moscow still has a military base in Transnistria, guarding a stockpile of about 20,000 tonnes of munitions which were brought there when Soviet troops withdrew from Europe.
Chisinau has long called for the Russian troops to leave.
A senior Russian military official last week raised the issue of "oppression" of Russian speakers in Transnistria in the context of Russia's military campaign in Ukraine.
Major General Rustam Minnekayev, acting commander of the central military district, on Friday said that Russia sought control of southern Ukraine, which could provide access to Transnistria, "where there have been cases of oppression of the Russian-speaking population".
Moldova's foreign ministry summoned Russia's ambassador over the comments, which it called "unfounded and contradicting Russia's position in support of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our country within internationally recognised borders".
Moldova, a former Soviet republic of 2.6 million people, is one of Europe's poorest countries. President Sandu was elected in 2020 on a pro-Western programme.
Unlike neighbouring Romania, Moldova is not a member of North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). It formally requested to join the bloc in March.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.