
      China's DJI halts Russia, Ukraine sales to prevent use of its drones in combat
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

SHENZHEN: Drone giant DJI Technology Co said it will temporarily suspend business in Russia and Ukraine to ensure its products are not used in combat, making it the first major Chinese firm to cite the conflict in halting sales in Russia.
Ukrainian officials and citizens have accused DJI of leaking data on the Ukrainian military to Russia - allegations the world's largest maker of consumer and industrial drones has called "utterly false".
In contrast to the many Western firms that have pulled out of Russia to protest its invasion of Ukraine, Chinese companies have stayed there, in line with Beijing's stance of refraining from criticism of Moscow over the conflict.
A DJI spokesperson said on Wednesday (Apr 27) that its suspension of business in Russia and Ukraine was "not to make a statement about any country, but to make a statement about our principles".
"DJI abhors any use of our drones to cause harm, and we are temporarily suspending sales in these countries in order to help ensure no one uses our drones in combat."
A company representative said last month DJI was aware of footage online that suggested the Russian military was using its products, but it had not been able to confirm this and the company had no control over the use of its products.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a "special operation" to disarm Ukraine and protect it from fascists. Ukraine and the West say this is a false pretext for an unprovoked war of aggression.
Privately held DJI does not release financial information but research firm Drone Analyst has estimated that it had hardware revenue of US$2.9 billion in 2020.
The conflict has put Chinese companies in a bind. Continuing to operate in Russia has drawn international criticism, but withdrawing would risk a backlash from the Chinese public.
In February, ride-hailing giant Didi Global reversed a decision to leave Russia and Kazakhstan after domestic social media users accused it of succumbing to US pressure.
Telecoms equipment maker Huawei Technologies is also under scrutiny over whether it plans to stay in Russia. The company did not take any Russia-related questions at its annual analyst summit on Tuesday.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.