
      Russia reports blasts in south that Ukraine calls payback for invasion
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

In this file photo taken by an anonymous source on Apr 25, 2022, smoke rises from oil storage facilities hit by fire in Bryansk, Russia. (File photo: AP)
LONDON: Russia reported a series of blasts in the south of the country and a fire at an ammunition depot on Wednesday (Apr 27), the latest in a spate of incidents that a top Ukrainian official described as payback and "karma" for Moscow's invasion.
Without directly admitting that Ukraine was responsible, presidential adviser Mykhailo Podolyak said it was natural that Russian regions where fuel and weapons are stored were learning about "demilitarisation".
The use of that word was a pointed reference to Moscow's stated objective for the nine-week-old war in Ukraine, which it calls a special military operation to disarm and "denazify" its neighbour.
"If (Russians) decide to massively attack another country, massively kill everyone there, massively crush peaceful people with tanks, and use warehouses in your regions to enable the killings, then sooner or later the debts will have to be repaid," Podolyak said.
The blasts on Wednesday followed a major fire this week at a Russian oil storage facility in the Bryansk region near the border.
Earlier this month, Russia accused Ukraine of attacking a fuel depot in Belgorod with helicopters, which a top Kyiv security official denied, and opening fire on several villages in the province.
The incidents have exposed Russian vulnerabilities in areas close to Ukraine that are vital to its military logistics chains.
"KARMA IS CRUEL"
In the latest incidents, Belgorod regional governor Vyacheslav Gladkov said that a fire at an ammunition depot had been extinguished and that no civilians had been injured.
Roman Starovoyt, the governor of Kursk, another province that borders Ukraine, said that explosions had also been heard in Kursk city early on Wednesday, and that they were most likely the sounds of air defence systems firing.
He later said that a Ukrainian unmanned aerial vehicle was intercepted in the sky over Kursk region, adding that there were no casualties or damage.
In Voronezh, the administrative centre of another southern province, the TASS news agency cited an emergencies ministry official as saying that two blasts had been heard and the authorities were investigating.
Regional governor Alexander Gusev said in the morning that an air defence system had detected and destroyed a small reconnaissance drone.
Russia said that it was sending investigators to the Kursk and Voronezh regions to document what it calls "illegal actions by the Ukrainian army".
Ukraine's Podolyak said that it was not possible to "sit out" the Russian invasion.
"And therefore, the disarmament of the Belgorod and Voronezh killers' warehouses is an absolutely natural process. Karma is a cruel thing," he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.