
      Ukraine President Zelenskyy says Indonesian leader Jokowi invited him to G20 summit
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Indonesia's President Joko Widodo speaks at a meeting during the United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, Scotland, on Nov 2, 2021. (File photo: Reuters/Yves Herman)
JAKARTA: Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy on Wednesday (Apr 27) said on Twitter that his Indonesian counterpart Joko Widodo had invited him to attend the summit of Group of 20 (G20) major economies to be held in the Southeast Asian country later this year.
"Had talks with President @jokowi ... Appreciate inviting me to the @g20org summit," he said in a tweet, referring to the Indonesian president, the current G20 chair, by his nickname.
Indonesia's presidential palace and state secretary's office did not immediately respond to requests for comment.
Ukraine is not a member of the G20, but the chairs of the grouping have previously invited countries as guests to join meetings.
Indonesian foreign ministry spokesperson Teuku Faizasyah did not immediately confirm Zelenskyy's invitation when contacted by Reuters, but said that the foreign minister had been "in consultations" and reported the results to Jokowi.
He did not specify who the consultations were with.
The G20 has condemned Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which, now in its ninth week, has raised geopolitical tensions, sent shockwaves through the global economy and sparked a humanitarian crisis.
Russia calls its actions in Ukraine a special operation.
Several G20 members have called for Russia and its President Vladimir Putin to be excluded from the leaders' summit in Bali in November, but Indonesia has demurred, saying it is too early to decide.
At a meeting of G20 finance officials in Washington last week, delegates from the United States, Britain and Canada walked out on Russia's delegates.
Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Idrawati acknowledged that the body faced unprecedented challenges but called for cooperation to overcome headwinds slowing global growth.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.