
      Swedish PM rejects referendum on possible NATO membership
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

FILE PHOTO: Sweden's Prime Minister Magdalena Andersson speaks during a news conference with Finland's Prime Minister Sanna Marin, amid Russia's invasion of Ukraine, in Stockholm, Sweden, April 13, 2022. Paul Wennerholm/TT News Agency/via REUTERS
STOCKHOLM : Sweden's government does not plan to hold a referendum if its parliament decides to proceed with an application for North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) membership, Prime Minister Magdalena Andersson said on Friday (Apr 29).
Russia's invasion of Ukraine has forced both Sweden and Finland to review long held beliefs that military neutrality is the best means of ensuring national security, with both countries expected to make a decision in the coming few weeks.
Andersson said that a referendum was a "bad idea".
"I don't think it is an issue that is suitable for a referendum," she told reporters.
"There is a lot of information about national security that is confidential, so there are important issues in such a referendum that cannot be discussed and important facts that cannot be put on the table."
Sweden's parliament is reviewing security policy with a report expected in mid-May. Separately, Andersson's own party, the Social Democrats, are looking at whether to drop their objections to NATO membership.
With a majority in parliament backing membership, the ruling Social Democrats are seen as the biggest hurdle to Sweden applying to join the 30-nation alliance.
The leader of the Moderates, the biggest opposition party, has also rejected calls for a referendum on the issue.
"Voters ... are not naive about Russia," Ulf Kristersson told daily Aftonbladet earlier this week in a debate with Left Party leader Nooshi Dadgostar. "It's very clear that Swedish voters have understood what happened on Feb 24 and have drawn their conclusions."
Dadgostar, whose party opposes NATO membership, told Aftonbladet that Swedes should get a say in the decision.
"This ... has to go back to the voters, there has to be very strong democratic support in this question," she said.
Sweden holds a general election in September.
An opinion poll by Demoskop in daily Aftonbladet published on Apr 20 showed 57 per cent of Swedes in favour of joining NATO, up from 51 per cent in March.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.