
      US frowns on Indonesia's invite to Putin for G20 summit
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

President Joko Widodo of Indonesia, which holds the Group of Twenty (G20) presidency this year, has been under pressure from the West to exclude Russia following its invasion of Ukraine. (File photo: AFP/Sonny Tumbelaka)
JAKARTA: Indonesia faced down United States opposition and invited Russian President Vladimir Putin to the Group of Twenty (G20) summit in November, as well as Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, President Joko Widodo said on Friday (Apr 29).
Jakarta, which holds the G20 presidency this year, has been under heavy pressure from the West, led by the US, to exclude Russia following its invasion of Ukraine, but it has argued that it must remain "impartial".
"I have invited President Zelenskyy to attend the G20 summit," said Widodo, suggesting that a compromise had been reached following pressure from US President Joe Biden and others to allow Ukraine's participation to strike a balance.
Putin confirmed in a phone call with Widodo that he will attend the summit, to take place on Bali island, the Indonesian leader said in a livestreamed address.
Russia is a G20 member, while Ukraine is not.
Biden's administration made clear its view on Putin's invitation on Friday.
"The president has expressed publicly his opposition to President Putin attending the G20. We have welcomed the Ukrainians attending," Biden press secretary Jen Psaki said in Washington.
"We have conveyed our view that we don't think (Russia) should be a part of it publicly and privately," she told reporters, adding that Washington understood the invite was issued "before the invasion".
"The United States continues to believe that it can't be business as usual with regards to Russia's participation with the international community or international institutions," State Department deputy spokesperson Jalina Porter told reporters when asked about the invitation.
She did not comment on whether the US would still attend.
INDONESIA SEEKING NEUTRALITY
Zelenskyy had announced in a tweet that he was invited to the summit by Indonesia on Wednesday, following a call with Widodo.
Widodo met with the Russian president on Thursday, saying: "Putin thanked Indonesia for the invitation to the G20 summit and said he would attend."
During the conversation, Putin wished Indonesia's G20 presidency "success", Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters.
"(But) for the time being, it is premature to communicate the modalities of Russian participation", he said, leaving the format of Moscow's participation in doubt.
The West has attempted to diplomatically isolate Russia since the beginning of its military offensive in February.
A meeting of G20 finance ministers in April in Washington illustrated the deep divisions in the group of the world's major economies, with the US and several allies boycotting talks to protest Russian participation.
But Indonesia, like most major emerging economies, has tried to maintain a neutral position.
Widodo said on Friday that Indonesia would not send weapons to Ukraine in response to a request from Zelenskyy, instead offering humanitarian aid.
The war in Ukraine was again a major talking point on Friday when Widodo spoke with Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida.
The Indonesian president called for an immediate end to hostilities and stressed the need for a "peaceful solution".
Kishida agreed that the violence must end, but used stronger language to describe the conflict.
"An infringement on sovereignty and territorial integrity through the use of force and intimidation, as well as an attempt to unilaterally change the status quo by force, are unacceptable in any region," he said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.