
      20 civilians leave Mariupol's Azovstal site: Ukraine regiment 
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

The latest satellite pictures taken on Apr 29, 2022, by Maxar Technologies show massive damage to the Azovstal steel plant. (File photo: AFP/Maxar Technologies)
KYIV: A group of 20 civilians are leaving the Azovstal steelworks, where the last Ukrainian troops in the Black Sea port of Mariupol are holed up, the soldiers there said on Saturday (Apr 30).
"Twenty civilians, women and children ... have been transferred to a suitable place and we hope that they will be evacuated to Zaporizhzhia, on territory controlled by Ukraine," said Sviatoslav Palamar, deputy commander of the Azov regiment.
They were still going through the rubble searching for civilians to rescue after a night of Russian bombardment there, he added, in a video posted on Telegram.
Earlier on Saturday, a correspondent from Russia's TASS news agency reported from the city that 25 civilians - including six children younger than 14 - had quit the site.
"All night, the enemy artillery bombarded the site," Palamar added.
"The ceasefire that should have started at 6am (3am GMT) didn't start until 11am. Since then, the two sides have respected it," he added.
"The evacuation convoy we had been expecting at 6am only arrived at 6.25pm.
"The Azov regiment is still clearing the rubble to get civilians out," said Palamar. "We hope this procedure will continue that we will manage to evacuate all the civilians."
No attempt to evacuate people from the Azovstal site has so far succeeded.
HEAVY BOMBARDMENT ON FRIDAY
Palamar added that for the moment they were not trying to evacuate the wounded for treatment in Ukrainian-held territory.
Several hundred Ukrainian soldiers and civilians are sheltering in the maze of Soviet-era underground tunnels underneath the Azovstal steelworks, and many of them require medical attention.
Ukraine's presidency said on Friday that the evacuation of some civilians had been planned for that day.
An AFP team on a press trip to Mariupol organised by the Russian army on Friday heard heavy bombardment at the Azovstal site from the morning into mid-afternoon.
In the afternoon, the explosions were spaced only seconds apart, and some of them seemed particularly powerful.
The latest satellite images from Maxar Technologies, taken on Friday, show that nearly all the buildings at the steelworks have been destroyed.
Some roofs have been holed or complete caved in, some buildings reduced to rubble.
A United Nations representative to Ukraine, Osnat Lubrani, said earlier this week that she was travelling to the central city of Zaporizhzhia to prepare for a "hopeful" evacuation.
UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Thursday during a visit to Kyiv that the UN was doing everything possible to ensure the evacuation of civilians from the "apocalypse" in Mariupol.
Russia last week said that it had gained full control of the strategic port city, except for the huge Azovstal industrial area.
Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered a blockade of the steelworks.
Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy had repeatedly warned that if Russian forces killed the last remaining troops there, that would spell the end of any peace talks.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.