
      Ukrainian makes keychains from Russian fighter plane wreckage to fund war effort
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A keychain made from the fuselage of a Russian Su-34 wreck by a Ukrainian start-up, under the "Made in Russia, recycled in Ukraine" campaign, is pictured in Kyiv on Apr 29, 2022. (Photo: Reuters/Leonardo Benassatto)
KYIV: Never mind forging swords into ploughshares; a Ukrainian businessman is turning scraps of wreckage from a downed Russian fighter plane into souvenir key fobs and selling them abroad to support the war effort.
"Many of my friends tell me: 'US$1,000 - nobody will give you this for this piece of metal, it's crazy,'" said Iurii Vysoven, founder of Drones for Ukraine.
"In the morning, I woke up and understand on my phone (that) it's already (US$20,000 to) US$30,000 collected, and we see this constant flow of messages of people asking questions and telling (us that) they want to donate more, they tell us it is an incredible idea."
The aircraft is a Russian Su-34 two-seater tactical fighter-bomber that the Ukrainian military says it shot down over the town of Borodianka, north-west of Kyiv, early in March, when Russian forces were trying to capture and hold the area.
Ukraine's defence ministry has posted images of the wreckage, which it says had the tail number RF-81251 and the call sign 31 Red.
After the Russians withdrew and refocused their invasion on eastern Ukraine, Vysoven asked the region's defenders if he could have some of the wreckage, which was scattered over farmland.
The soldiers told him that both the aircraft's pilots had been killed. Among the wreckage shown by the ministry was a helmet stencilled in Russian with the last three letters of a surname ending "-NOV", and an empty leather holster marked "Buryat" - the name of an ethnic group that lives in Siberia.
Russia does not confirm details of its military losses, and Reuters was unable to verify the circumstances in which the plane came down.
Vysoven, who works in advertising, has oblong pieces about 10cm long stamped out of fragments of fuselage, then machined, polished and printed with information about the plane and a "thank you" to the buyer. Each is perforated to receive a keyring, and engraved with a unique serial number.
"The uniqueness of this keychain is that we made it from the wreckage of a real Russian plane," he said. "This is a really unique gift to those who helped us."
In his office, Vysoven has an example of the infra-red thermal imaging drones that he buys for the Ukrainian army with the proceeds of the keychains.
"Now that we have raised a lot more money, we feel a lot more responsibility," he said. "My dream is this fund - we wouldn't need it anymore. My dream is to win, everyone safe," he added, in English.
"Everyone return home safe. And (that) we don't need to collect money to save someone's life."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.