
      Sri Lanka tea exports lowest in 23 years
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Asia
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Asia
  

Tea plantation owners in Sri Lanka warn that a crop failure would cause huge unemployment. (File photo: AFP)
COLOMBO: Crisis-struck Sri Lanka's vital tea exports have dropped to their lowest level in 23 years, official figures showed on Wednesday (May 4), hit by a fertiliser ban and the war in Ukraine.
Tea is the island nation's biggest export commodity, bringing in about US$1.3 billion annually before the current economic downturn, the worst since independence in 1948.
But a bungled ban on fertiliser imports last year - introduced in a doomed effort to save foreign currency and avoid a debt default - hit growers hard, with production falling 18 per cent on-year for the period from November 2021 to February 2022.
Customs data showed that first-quarter exports in 2022 correspondingly plunged to 63.7 million kilograms, down from 69.8 million kilograms in the January-March period last year.
The tally was the lowest since the first quarter of 1999, when the country shipped out 60.3 million kilograms of tea.
Export earnings for the first quarter also declined, to US$287 million from US$338 million.
Tea brokering firm Asia Siyaka blamed the drop on the agro chemical ban, which was portrayed by the government as a push to turn Sri Lankan farming 100 per cent organic.
The ban was lifted by October following backlash from the industry, but farmers were left unable to access imported fertiliser as the country simultaneously ran out of dollars.
Industry officials added that about 10 per cent of Sri Lanka's tea exports had also been affected by Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Both countries are top buyers of the island's aromatic black tea.
The country of 22 million lacks enough foreign currency to finance even the most essential imports such as food, fuel and medicines.
Dire shortages and galloping inflation have led to widespread protests calling for President Gotabaya Rajapaksa to step down.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.