
      Ukraine, Russia production critical to restoring global food security, UN chief says
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Local residents carry foodstuff while walking past an apartment building damaged during Ukraine-Russia conflict in the besieged southern port city of Mariupol, Ukraine, on  Mar 31, 2022. (Photo: REUTERS/Alexander Ermochenko)
ABUJA: UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Wednesday (May 4) the problem of global food security could not be solved without restoring Ukrainian agricultural production and Russian food and fertiliser output to the world market.
Russia's invasion of Ukraine in February has added to volatility in financial markets, sending commodity prices higher and affecting logistics, potentially derailing the economic recovery from COVID-19 in many countries including Nigeria.
"Our analysis indicates that the war in Ukraine is only making things worse, setting in motion a three-dimensional crisis that is devastating global food, energy and financial systems for developing countries," Guterres told reporters during a maiden visit to Abuja, Nigeria's capital.
"There is really no true solution to the problem of global food security without bringing back the agriculture production of Ukraine and the food and fertiliser production of Russia and Belarus into world markets despite the war," he said.
Guterres said he was determined to facilitate dialogue to help achieve those goals.
He said the United Nations had called for an extra US$351 million as part of the overall US$1.1 billion for the humanitarian response plan for Nigeria. President Muhammadu Buhari said the continent was concerned that the attention on Russia and Ukraine could crowd out other issues.
Nigeria had to buy emergency supplies of Canadian potash in April after it was unable to import the key fertiliser from Russia due to the impact of Western sanctions, the head of Nigerian sovereign investment authority NSIA said.
Last month, the International Monetary Fund said the Russian invasion of Ukraine had delivered a further "huge negative shock" to sub-Saharan Africa, driving food and energy prices higher and putting the most vulnerable people at risk of hunger.
The extra pressure comes as many countries are still reeling from the protracted COVID-19 pandemic.
"We need to ensure a steady flow in food and energies through open markets by lifting all unnecessary export restrictions, directing surpluses and reserves to those in need and keeping a lead on food prices to curb market volatility," Guterres said.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.