
      Putin to send 'doomsday' warning to West at Russia's WWII victory parade
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

A Russian Su-35S combat aircraft and a Tu-95MS strategic bomber fly in formation above a church in Moscow on May 4, 2022, during a rehearsal for a Victory Day flypast. The flypast will be part of a military parade marking the anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany in World War II. (File photo: Reuters/Maxim Shemetov)
LONDON: President Vladimir Putin will send a "doomsday" warning to the West when he leads Victory Day celebrations next Monday (May 9) marking the 77th anniversary of the Soviet Union's defeat of Nazi Germany, brandishing Russia's vast firepower while its forces fight on in Ukraine.
Defiant in the face of deep Western isolation since he ordered the invasion of Russia's neighbour, Putin will speak on Red Square before a parade of troops, tanks, rockets and intercontinental ballistic missiles.
A flypast over St Basil's Cathedral will include supersonic fighters, Tu-160 strategic bombers and, for the first time since 2010, the Il-80 "doomsday" command plane, which would carry Russia's top brass in the event of a nuclear war, the defence ministry said.
In that scenario, the Il-80 is designed to become the roaming command centre for the Russian president. It is packed with technology, but specific details are Russian state secrets.
The 69-year-old Kremlin leader has repeatedly likened the war in Ukraine to the challenge the Soviet Union faced when Adolf Hitler's Nazis invaded in 1941.
"The attempt to appease the aggressor on the eve of the Great Patriotic War turned out to be a mistake that cost our people dearly," Putin said on Feb 24 when he announced what he called a special military operation in Ukraine.
"We will not make such a mistake a second time, we have no right."
Putin casts the war in Ukraine as a battle to protect Russian speakers there from persecution by Nazis and to guard against what he terms the American threat to Russia posed by the enlargement of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
Ukraine and the West dismiss the fascism claim as nonsense and say that Putin is waging an unprovoked war of aggression.
The Soviet Union lost 27 million people in World War II, more than any other country, and Putin has railed in recent years at what Moscow sees as attempts in the West to revise the history of the war to belittle the Soviet victory.
Beside the 1812 defeat of French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte, the defeat of Nazi Germany is the Russians' most revered military triumph, though both catastrophic invasions from the west left Russia deeply sensitive about its borders.
SHADOW OF UKRAINE
The war in Ukraine will cast a long shadow over this Victory Day.
Russia's invasion has killed thousands of people and displaced nearly 10 million. It has also left Russia in the grip of tough Western sanctions, and has raised fears of a wider confrontation between Russia and the United States - by far the world's biggest nuclear powers.
Although 11,000 troops marching across Red Square along with what the defence ministry has said will be 131 pieces of military hardware will present a grand spectacle, the Ukraine conflict has exposed weaknesses in Russia's armed forces despite Putin's attempt in his two decades in power to halt the post-Soviet decline.
The Kremlin has been denied a quick victory, and the Russian economy - squeezed hard by sanctions - is facing its worst contraction since the years following the fall of the Soviet Union.
Less than two decades ago, US President George W Bush joined Putin for the May 9 celebrations in Moscow. This year, no Western leader was invited, the Kremlin said.
The US and its allies have ramped up supplies of weapons to Ukraine, and Putin has faced calls from some in the Russian military to unleash greater firepower on its southern neighbour, two sources close to the armed forces told Reuters. Moscow has told the West that its arms supplies are legitimate targets.
Ahead of May 9, speculation swirled across Moscow and Western capitals that Putin was preparing some sort of special announcement on Ukraine, perhaps an outright declaration of war or even a national mobilisation.
Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov dismissed those suggestions on Wednesday, describing them as "nonsense".
The Kremlin did not respond to requests for comment on what Putin might say in his speech, to be delivered from the Red Square tribune in front of Vladimir Lenin's mausoleum.
Last year, Putin jabbed at Western exceptionalism and what he said was the rise of neo-Nazism and Russophobia - trends he has returned to again and again when addressing the issue of Ukraine.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.