
      Zelenskyy, German parliament president discuss arms, Ukraine's EU membership bid
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Ukraine's President Volodymyr Zelenskyy speaks during a session of a parliament in Kyiv, Ukraine, on May 3, 2022. (Photo: Ukrainian Presidential Press Service/Handout via REUTERS)
FRANKFURT: The president of the German parliament Baerbel Bas met Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Kyiv on Sunday (May 8) to commemorate victims of World War II, discuss arms and Ukraine's ambition to be considered for European Union (EU) membership.
In a video of a meeting with Bas, Zelenskyy said securing the Bundestag's approval of heavy arms deliveries to help Ukraine fend off Russian attacks was one his country's "top priorities".
He also asked Bas and the Bundestag to support Ukraine in its bid for European Union membership, which Kyiv's allies have said they want soon. However, candidature would have to be agreed unanimously and accession usually takes years of complex negotiations.
Zelenskyy earlier gave an emotional address for Victory Day, when Europe remembers the formal surrender of Germany to the Allies in World War II, saying that "evil has returned" to Ukraine, but it wouldn't be able to escape responsibility.
Bas told German newspaper Rheinische Post that she had assured Zelenskyy of Germany's solidarity and ongoing support in Ukraine's fight for its existence.
The two also agreed that peace should not be dictated by Russia, Bas was cited as saying in a story abstract released ahead of publication by the paper on Monday.
"We agreed that there must not be a dictated peace but only one brokered through a fair peace agreement," she said.
Regarding Ukraine's EU membership bid, "the Bundestag will speed all necessary procedures," she said.
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz is expected to take part in a G7 virtual discussion later on Sunday on the war in Ukraine that will be attended by Zelenskyy.
Germany has agreed to supply Kyiv with heavy weapons, including self-propelled howitzers, in a reversal of a longtime policy not to send heavy weapons to war zones due to the country's Nazi past.
Moscow calls its actions since Feb 24 a "special military operation" to disarm Ukraine and rid it of what it calls "Nazis" and anti-Russian nationalism fomented by the West.
In Russia, Victory Day on May 9 is one of the country's most important national events - a remembrance of the enormous sacrifices made by the Soviet Union in defeating Nazi Germany.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.