
      Commentary: Boosting defence spending now won't fix NATO's decades of under-investment
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      Commentary
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      Commentary
  

Russia's heavy losses in Ukraine raise questions about whether they can continue operations at this rate. The West will find itself in similar trouble in the event of a long war, as defence spending has remained consistently below target, says an academic.
READING, England: The West has to dramatically “reboot” its approach to dealing with aggressors in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, according to United Kingdom foreign secretary Liz Truss. 
“Geopolitics is back,” she told an audience at the Mansion House in London recently in what has been reported as a major foreign policy speech. “We must be assertive. Aggressors are looking at what has happened in Ukraine. We need to make sure that they get the right message.”
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) members appear to be on board with this in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and many countries now plan to spend more on their defence budgets. 
UKRAINE WAR SPURS NATO COMMITMENTS
But decades of under-investment in defence have left the West vulnerable. And the billions of dollars of military aid that some of these countries have already sent to Ukraine highlight many of the problems.
Across NATO, defence spending is now on the rise. In the immediate wake of the invasion of Ukraine, German chancellor Olaf Scholz announced a €100 billion (US$105 billion) fund to upgrade the country’s armed forces and pledged to maintain a defence budget of 2 per cent of GDP in future. 
Denmark says it will achieve the 2 per cent goal by 2033, after having historically spent far below the NATO average on its defence. Sweden and Finland, currently discussing whether they should join NATO, are also increasing their spending on defence. 
Finland’s defence budget was around 1.5 per cent of its GDP in 2020, but the government announced a one-time injection of €2 billion, or 70 per cent of the existing budget, following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Sweden has announced its intention to reach the 2 per cent target as soon as it can.
UNDER-INVESTMENT A DECADES-LONG ISSUE
Truss said: “We are correcting a generation of under-investment.” But it’s more than a generation as far as NATO more broadly is concerned. Spending has been consistently cut despite warnings.
In 2018, then United States president, Donald Trump, commented that European members of NATO were not spending enough on defence and suggested that the US might leave the alliance. But the US has for decades felt that Europe’s NATO members do not carry enough of the burden for protecting Europe, as it spends much more on defence as a percentage of its GDP than they do.
Since 2014, NATO has specified that members must spend 2 per cent of their GDP on defence. Truss said in her speech that this must be a floor rather than a ceiling. That will be difficult for some NATO nations to swallow. Most were significantly below the 2 per cent target in 2019.
In the UK, defence spending fell from just over 6 per cent of the GDP in 1955 to 4.1 per cent in 1990. This reduction was during periods of heightened tension in the Cold War. Other countries contributed even less. 
During the 1970s and 1980s, several US and British units were earmarked for deployment to Denmark because NATO command knew that its forces were inadequate for the task even of self-defence. The fall of the Soviet Union and the associated peace dividend led most Western nations to cut defence spending almost in half. 
The UK defence budget fell further to 2.25 per cent in 2004 and remained at 2.1 per cent between 2015 and 2019 – after Ukraine had been invaded and Crimea annexed.
Indeed, the 2 per cent spend for Britain was arguably only reached after some “creative accounting” in the Ministry of Defence’s budget. This evidence throws doubt on Truss’ comment that “we’ve shown that we’re prepared to prioritise security and respect for sovereignty over short-term economic gain”.
THE WEST MUST TAKE DEFENCE INVESTMENT SERIOUSLY
To save money, Western governments have cut defence spending and depended on limited numbers of weapon systems and military equipment. This makes sense to most people in peacetime. 
But it does mean that any large conflict needs to be quickly won before the supply of ammunition runs out, or all the weapon systems wear out or are destroyed.
We see discussion among military commentators about the number of main battle tank (MBT) losses that the Russian have sustained, and whether they can continue operations at this rate and replace their losses. But the same iron laws of demand and supply apply to NATO equipment and its manufactures.
Defence manufacturer Raytheon reports it cannot ramp up production because of a very limited stock of material for its Stinger anti-aircraft missiles. While Stingers are old technology, the problem will also be encountered with newer weapon systems.
The most talked-about weapons, next-generation light anti-tank weapons (NLAWs), were developed by the Swedish company Saab in a joint venture between the Swedish and British defence ministries. Although overall production figures are not public, the initial NLAW project in the British Army was for an acquisition of 14,002 units.
The US has sent 7,000 Javelin anti-tank guided missiles (ATGMs) to Ukraine. This is one-third of US stocks of the missile. 
While using up legacy stocks of missiles allows NATO members to freshen their stockpiles with the latest versions, use is outstripping production. Under-investment and the false logic of preparing for a “come-as-you-are” war have come home to roost.
In concluding her speech, Truss said: “We thought that we’d learned the lessons of history and that the march of progress would continue unchallenged. We were wrong.” 
How much will the West learn from the invasion of Ukraine – and, more importantly, will the lessons of history stick this time? There is no evidence to suggest they will.
Kenton White is a Lecturer in Strategic Studies and International Relations at the University of Reading. This commentary first appeared in The Conversation.
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.