
      Ukraine to hold first war crimes trial as Moscow says Kyiv shelled Russian city
  


      Follow our news
  
Main navigation


      World
  


      Follow our news
  
Advertisement
Advertisement


      World
  

Workers clean rubble from a building destroyed by shelling weeks ago in Cherkaske, eastern Ukraine, on May 11, 2022. (File photo: AFP/Yasuyoshi Chiba)
KYIV: Ukraine announced that it will hold its first war crimes trial over the Russian invasion, as Moscow accused Kyiv of shelling a Russian city in the war's latest flash point.
The conflict has devastated cities and displaced millions, with fears also growing of its broader international impact as gas supplies to Europe were disrupted by a halt in Russian flows through Ukraine.
Kyiv has repeatedly accused Russian troops of committing atrocities since the invasion began on Feb 24, and Ukrainian authorities said on Wednesday (May 11) that they would launch the first war crimes trial of the conflict.
The prosecutor general's office said that Vadim Shishimarin, a 21-year-old Russian service member, is accused of killing an unarmed 62-year-old civilian as he fled with four other soldiers in a stolen car.
"The man died on the spot just a few dozen metres from his home," said a statement from prosecutor Iryna Venediktova's office.
Shishimarin faces possible life imprisonment if found guilty.
Venediktova's office has said it has received reports of more than 10,000 alleged war crimes, with 622 suspects identified.
The Russian invasion has sparked an exodus of nearly 6 million civilians, many of whom bear accounts of torture, sexual violence and indiscriminate destruction.
The United Nations Human Rights Council is due to hold a special session on Ukraine on Thursday.
Moscow has focused on eastern and southern Ukraine since it failed to take Kyiv in the first weeks of its campaign.
Ukraine's forces were boosted by what Kyiv described as the recapture of four villages around the north-eastern city of Kharkiv, close to the border with Russia.
In the Russian city of Belgorod, around 70km from Kharkiv, authorities said that one person was killed and six injured by Ukrainian shelling.
Belgorod governor Vyacheslav Gladkov said that it was "the most difficult situation" facing the border region since Russia sent its troops into Ukraine 11 weeks ago.
Authorities in Russian regions bordering Ukraine have repeatedly accused Ukrainian forces of launching attacks.
In April, Gladkov said that Ukrainian helicopters carried out a strike on a fuel storage facility in Belgorod.
"THEY COME IN WAVES"
In southern Ukraine, the pro-Kremlin authorities in the city of Kherson urged Russian President Vladimir Putin to annex the region.
Kherson was the first major Ukrainian city to fall in the current conflict. It lies north of Crimea, which was annexed by Russia in 2014.
Kirill Stremousov, deputy head of Kherson's Moscow-installed administration, said that there would be a "request to make Kherson region a full subject of the Russian Federation".
The Kremlin replied that it was up to the residents of Kherson to "determine their own fate".
Ukrainian presidential aide Mykhaylo Podolyak said that Kherson would be liberated and "the invaders may ask to join even Mars or Jupiter".
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy has framed his nation's resistance to the Russian invasion as a "war against tyranny", but the fierce fightback has carried a heavy cost.
In a rare release of battle casualty figures, Ukraine's National Guard said on Wednesday that 561 of its members have been killed and nearly 1,700 wounded since the invasion began.
Neither the defence ministry in Kyiv nor its counterpart in Moscow has provided official death counts, but in mid-April, Zelenskyy said that between 2,500 and 3,000 Ukrainian soldiers had been killed.
Ukraine's effort to hold the Russian-speaking Donbas region in the east has also become increasingly desperate.
"They come in waves," volunteer fighter Mykola said of the repeated Russian attempts to push past a strategic river near a rural settlement called Bilogorivka.
NATO DECISION BY FINLAND, SWEDEN
Much of the world has moved to isolate Putin as punishment for the invasion.
Russia "is today the most direct threat to the world order with the barbaric war against Ukraine", European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said in Tokyo on Thursday after meeting Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida.
Kishida, whose government joined the tough measures against Moscow, added: "Russia's invasion of Ukraine is not just a matter for Europe, but it shakes the core of the international order including Asia. This must not be tolerated."
Russia has been hit with a wave of punishing economic sanctions that have started to take a toll on its foreign exchange reserves.
Zelenskyy said on Wednesday that he had spoken with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz about boosting penalties on Moscow.
"Step by step, we are doing everything to make the aggressor feel the biggest pain from the aggression," the Ukrainian leader said.
But ramping up the embargoes has not been straightforward, with concern among some nations in Europe that rely on Russian gas.
Kyiv said on Wednesday that Russia had halted gas supplies through a key transit hub in the east.
The stoppage caused supplies to plunge by 25 per cent in Germany, which is dependent on Russia for its energy and has rejected an immediate full embargo on Russian gas.
The invasion of Ukraine has also prompted Sweden and Finland to consider North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) membership.
Finland was due to reveal its position on joining the bloc on Thursday.
A MOTHER MOURNS
A Ukrainian commander in Mariupol appealed directly to Elon Musk on Wednesday, asking the world's richest man to intervene on behalf of those trapped by Russian forces in the southern port city.
The war has devastated Mariupol, where Ukrainians have sustained a pocket of resistance at a steel factory.
Iryna Yegorchenko, 43, learned on Wednesday that her soldier son Artem had died protecting the Azovstal plant.
"I suddenly felt relieved," she told AFP.
The 22-year-old was crushed during the collapse of a structure and "quickly went to God", said Yegorchenko, who lives in Kyiv.
"He decided to defend his homeland, his people ... I have nothing to be ashamed of as a mother."
Advertisement

      Also worth reading
  
Advertisement

      CNA Sections
  

      About CNA
  

      Pressed for time? Stay informed with CNA's newsletters
  

      This service is not intended for persons residing in the E.U. By clicking subscribe, I agree to receive news updates and promotional material from Mediacorp and Mediacorp's partners. 
  

      Follow our news
  
 Copyright© Mediacorp 2022. Mediacorp Pte Ltd. All rights reserved. 

      This browser is no longer supported
  
We know it's a hassle to switch browsers but we want your experience with CNA to be fast, secure and the best it can possibly be.